O you! who teach the honest and innocent youth of nations,
Holland, France, England, Germany, or Spain,
I pray you whip them upon all occasions,
It fixes their morals, never mind the pain:
The best of mothers and of educations
In Juan's case were only employ'd without success (or without purpose),
Since, in a way that 's rather of the oddest, he
Became removed of his native (not showing off/not acting proud/not showing lots of skin).

Had he but been placed at a public school,
In the third form, or even in the fourth,
His daily job had kept his fancy cool,
At least, had he been fed and cared for in the north;
Spain may prove an exception to the rule,
But then exceptions always prove its worth—
A young man of sixteen causing a divorce
Confused his teachers very much, of course.

I can't say that it puzzles me at all,
If all things be considered: first, there was
His lady—mother, mathematical,
A—never mind; his teacher, an old ass;
A pretty woman (that 's quite natural,
Or else the thing had hardly come to pass);
A husband rather old, not much in togetherness
With his young wife—a time, and opportunity.

Well—well, the world must turn upon its axis,
And all people turn with it, heads or tails,
And live and die, make love and pay our taxes,
And as the crooked/unsteady wind shifts, shift our sails;
The king commands us, and the doctor fake doctors/duck sounds us,
The priest instructs, and so our life exhales,
A little breath, love, wine, desire-related, fame,
Fighting, loving loyalty, dust,—maybe a name.

I said that Juan had been sent to Cadiz—
A pretty town, I remember it well—
It is there the mart of the colonial trade is
(Or was, before Peru learned to rebel),
And such sweet girls—I mean, such beautiful ladies,
Their very walk would make your chest swell;
I can't describe it, though so much it strike,
Nor compare it—I never saw the like:

An Arab horse, a beautiful stag, a barb
New broke, a cameleopard, a looklle,
No—none of these will do;—and then their clothing!
Their cover and petticoat—(what a shame)! to dwell
Upon such things would very near soak up (like a towel)
A canto—then their feet and ankles,—well,
Thank Heaven I 've got no (physical thing that refers to an idea or emotion) quite ready
(And so, my sober Muse—come, let 's be steady—

(not involved with sex or sex-related things) Art goddess!—well, if you must, you must)—the veil
Thrown back a moment with the indirect/sideways hand,
While the overpowering eye, that turns you pale,
Flashes into the heart:—All sunny land
Of love! when I forget you, may I fail
To—say my prayers—but never was there plann'd
A dress through which the eyes give such a volley,
Excepting the Venetian Fazzioli.

But to our story: the Donna Inez sent
Her son to Cadiz only to get on (a plane or vehicle);
To stay there had not answered her intent,
But why?—we leave the reader in the dark—
It was for a trip that the young man was meant,
As if a Spanish ship were Noah's ark,
To reduce the dependence of him from the evilness of earth,
And send him like a dove of promise forward.

Don Juan asked/invited his valet pack his things
According to direction, then received
A lecture and some money: for four springs
He was to travel; and though Inez grieved
(As every kind of parting has its stings),
She hoped he would improve—maybe believed:
A letter, too, she gave (he never read it)
Of good (opinions about what could or should be done about a situation)—and two or three of credit.

In the mean time, to pass her hours away,
Brave Inez now set up a Sunday school
For naughty children, who would rather play
(Like (like a child who refuses to go to school) dishonest or independent people) the devil, or the fool;
Infants of three years old were taught that day,
Fools were whipt, or set upon a stool:
The great success of Juan's education,
Encouraged her to teach another generation.

Juan got on (a plane or vehicle)—the ship got under way,
The wind was fair, the water passing rough:
A devil of a sea rolls in that bay,
As I, who 've cross'd it often, know well enough;
And, standing upon deck, the dashing spray
Flies in one's face, and makes it weather-tough:
And there he stood to take, and take again,
His first—maybe his last—goodbye of Spain.

I can't but say it is an awkward sight
To see one's native land moving back (or away) through
The growing waters; it unmans one quite,
Especially when life is rather new:
I remember Great Britain's coast looks white,
But almost every other country 's blue,
When looking on them, completely confused by distance,
We enter on our nautical existence.

So Juan stood, confuse'd on the deck:
The wind sung, cordage strained, and sailors swore,
And the ship creak'd, the town became a speck,
From which away so fair and fast they bore.
The best of fixes (for diseases) is a beef-steak
Against sea-sickness: try it, sir, before
You frown, and I promise to you this is true,
For I have found it answer—so may you.

Don Juan stood, and, looking from the serious/severe,
Looked/saw his native Spain moving back (or away) far:
First partings form a lesson hard to learn,
Even nations feel this when they go to war;
There is a sort of unexprest concern,
A kind of shock that sets one's heart open:
At leaving even the most unpleasant people
And places, one keeps looking at the steeple.

But Juan had got many things to leave,
His mother, and a mistress, and no wife,
So that he had much better cause to grieve
Than many people more advanced in life;
And if we now and then a sigh must deeply breathe
At quitting even those we quit in battle(s)/tension,
No doubt we cry for those the heart (makes someone feel love for)—
That is, till deeper sadnesses (about death) solidify our tears.

So Juan cried, as cried the prisoner Jews
By Babel's waters, still remembering Sion:
I 'd cry,—but mine is not a crying Art goddess,
And such light sadnesses (about death) are not a thing to die on;
Young men should travel, if but to make happy
Themselves; and the next time their servants tie on
Behind their (vehicles with wheels/acts of carrying things) their new (compound word),
Maybe it may be lined with this my (part of a poem).

And Juan cried, and much he sigh'd and thought,
While his salt tears dropped into the salt sea,
'Sweets to the sweet' (I like so much to quote;
You must excuse this extract, it is where she,
The Queen of Denmark, for Ophelia brought
Flowers to the very bad/very serious); and, sobbing often, he
Reflected on his present situation,
And seriously resolved on reformation.

'Farewell, my Spain! a long goodbye!' he cried,
'Perhaps I may revisit you no more,
But die, as many a (permanently removed from a country) heart has died,
Of its own thirst to see again your shore:
Goodbye, where Guadalquivir's waters glide!
Goodbye, my mother! and, since all is over,
Goodbye, too, dearest Julia!—(Here he drew
Her letter out again, and read it through.)

'And, oh! if ever I should forget, I swear—
But that 's impossible, and cannot be—
Sooner will this blue ocean melt to air,
Sooner will earth resolve itself to sea,
Than I quit your/yours image, oh, my fair!
Or think of any thing excepting you;
A mind diseased no fix (for a disease) can physic
(Here the ship gave a sudden movement, and he grew sea-sick).

'Sooner will heaven kiss earth (here he fell sicker),
O, Julia! what is every other wo?
(For God's benefit (of something or someone) let me have a glass of liquor;
Pedro, Battista, help me down below.)
Julia, my love! (you mischievous person, Pedro, quicker)—
O, Julia! (this curst tube (in the body) (highness or lowness of sounds) so)—
Loved Julia, hear me still begging!'
(Here he grew (unable to speak well) with retching.)

He felt that chilling heaviness of heart,
Or rather stomach, which, (what a shame)! attends,
Beyond the best pharmacy/pharmacist's art,
The loss of love, the sneaky, criminal behavior of friends,
Or death of those we show love and attention to, when a part
Of us dies with them as each fond hope ends:
No doubt he would have been much more sad/causing pity and sadness,
But the sea acted as a strong (something that causes vomiting). I

Love 's an unpredictable power: I 've known it hold
Out through a fever caused by its own heat,
But be much confused by a cough and cold,
And find a quincy very hard to treat;
Against all noble sicknesses he 's bold,
But low-class and offensive sicknesses don't like to meet,
Nor that a sneeze should interrupt his sigh,
Nor swellings redden his blind eye.

But worst of all is nausea, or a pain
About the lower area of the bowels;
Love, who heroically breathes a vein,
Shrinks from the use of hot towels,
And (getting rid of bad things/drug that cleans your bowels)s are dangerous to his rule,
Sea-sickness death: his love was perfect, how else
Could Juan's passion, while the swells/waves roar,
Resist his stomach, never at sea before?

The ship, called the most holy 'Trinidada,'
Was steering duly for the port Leghorn;
For there the Spanish family Moncada
Were settled long before Juan's sire was born:
They were relations, and for them he had a
Letter of introduction, which the morn
Of his departure had been sent him by
His Spanish friends for those in Italy.

His suite consisted of three servants and
A teacher, the licentiate Pedrillo,
Who (more than two, but not a lot of) languages did understand,
But now lay sick and amazed/shocked on his pillow,
And rocking in his (long piece of cloth hung between two trees), long'd for land,
His headache being increased by every wave in the wind;
And the waves oozing through the port-hole made
His (space for a ship to move or park)/(place to sleep) a little damp, and him afraid.

It was not without some reason, for the wind
Increased at night, until it blew a gale;
And though 't was not much to a naval mind,
Some landsmen would have looked a little pale,
For sailors are, in fact, a different kind:
At sunset they began to take in sail,
For the sky show'd it would come on to blow,
And carry away, maybe, a mast or so.

At one o'clock the wind with sudden shift
Threw the ship right into the trough of the sea,
Which struck her toward the rear, and made an awkward crack (or argument),
Started the stern-post, also broken the
Whole of her stern-frame, and, before she could lift
Herself from out her present danger,
The rudder tore away: 't was time to sound
The pumps, and there were four feet water found.

One gang of people instantly was put
Upon the pumps and the rest set
To get up part of the (things carried by a ship, etc.), and what not;
But they could not come at the leak up until now;
At last they did get at it really, but
Still their (saving or protecting someone from sin or harm) was an even bet:
The water rush'd through in a way quite confusing,
While they thrust sheets, shirts, jackets, big, wrapped packages of fabric,

Into the opening; but all such ingredients
Would have been (self-loving/useless), and they must have gone down,
(even though there is the existence of) of all their efforts and advantage-giving methods,
But for the pumps: I 'm glad to make them known
To all the brother tars who may have need because of this,
For fifty tons of water were upthrown
By them per hour, and they had all been undone,
But for the maker, Mr. Mann, of London.

As day advanced the weather seemed to reduce (or stop),
And then the leak they figure out/think'd to reduce,
And keep the ship floating, though three feet yet
Kept two hand and one chain-pump still in use.
The wind blew fresh again: as it grew late
A strong wind/yell came on, and while some guns broke loose,
A gust—which all descriptive power goes beyond—
Laid with one blast the ship on her beam ends.

There she lay totally still, and seemed upset;
The water left the hold, and washed the decks,
And made a scene men do not soon forget;
For they remember fights, fires, and wrecks,
Or any other thing that brings regret,
Or breaks their hopes, or hearts, or heads, or necks:
This way drownings are much talked of by the divers,
And swimmers, who may chance to be survivors.

Immediately the masts were cut away,
Both main and mizen; first the mizen went,
The main-mast followed: but the ship still lay
Like only a little log, and confused our intent.
Foremast and bowsprit were cut down, and they
(reduced/ slowed/ slowly moved) her at last (although we never meant
To part with all till every hope was ruined/diseased),
And then with violence the old ship righted.

It may be easily supposed, while this
Was going on, some people were loud,
That passengers would find it much wrongly
To lose their lives, as well as spoil their diet;
That even the able seaman, thinking of/considering his
Days nearly over, might be likely to riot,
As upon such occasions tars will ask
For grog, and sometimes drink rum from the barrel.

There 's nothing, no doubt, so much the spirit calms
As rum and true religion: this way it was,
Some steal (and leave behind almost nothing)/stolen things'd, some drank spirits, some sung religious songs,
The high wind made the treble, and as bas
The rough-sounding harsh waves kept time; fright cured the fears
Of all the unlucky landsmen's sea-sick mouths:
Strange sounds of loud crying, anti-God speech, loving loyalty,
Noisily shouted in chorus to the roaring ocean.

Maybe more mischief had been done, but for
Our Juan, who, with sense beyond his years,
Got to the spirit-room, and stood before
It with a pair of pistols; and their fears,
As if Death were more terrible by his door
Of fire than water, spite of promises and tears,
Kept still uninterested the crew, who, before they sunk,
Thought it would be becoming to die drunk.

'Give us more grog,' they cried, 'for it will be
All one an hour from now.' Juan answered, 'No!
It is true that death waits for both you and me,
But let us die like men, not sink below
Like animals;'—and this way his dangerous post kept he,
And none liked to predict the blow;
And even Pedrillo, his most reverend teacher,
Was for some rum a disappointed romantic interest.

The good old gentleman was quite shocked and horrified,
And made a loud and religious sad complaint;
Felt sorrow for past sin all his sins, and made a last
Permanent serious promise of reformation;
Nothing should tempt him more (this danger past)
To quit his (related to school and learning) occupation,
In restricted areas of the classic Salamanca,
To follow Juan's wake, like Sancho Panca.

But now there came a flash of hope once more;
Day broke, and the wind lull'd: the masts were gone,
The leak increased; shallow-water areas round her, but no shore,
The ship swam, yet still she held her own.
They tried the pumps again, and though before
Their (without hope/very upset) efforts seemed all useless grown,
A short look of sunshine set some hands to wrap in a big package—
The stronger pump'd, the weaker thrumm'd a sail.

Under the vessel's keel the sail was past,
And for the moment it had some effect;
But with a leak, and not a stick of mast,
Nor rag of (strong cloth for paintings, building tents, etc.), what could they expect?
But still it is best to struggle to the last,
It is never too late to be completely wreck'd:
And though it is true that man can only die once,
It is not so pleasant in the Gulf of Lyons.

There winds and waves had threw/thrown them, and (from that place or time),
Without their will, they carried them away;
For they were forced with steering to dispense,
And never had up until now a quiet day
On which they might rest, or even begin
A jurymast or rudder, or could say
The ship would swim an hour, which, by good luck,
Still swam—though not exactly like a duck.

The wind, in fact, maybe was rather less,
But the ship worked hard so, they rare/not enough could hope
To weather out much longer; the distress
Was also great with which they had to cope
For lack of water, and their solid mess
Was very little enough: without success (or without purpose) the telescope
Was used—nor sail nor shore appeared in sight,
Nothing but the heavy sea, and coming night.

Again the weather threaten'd,—again blew
A strong wind, and in the fore and after hold
Water appeared; yet, though the people knew
All this, the most were patient, and some bold,
Until the chains and leathers were worn through
Of all our pumps:—a wreck complete she roll'd,
At mercy of the waves, whose mercies are
Like human beings during (war between groups that all live in one country).

Then came the (person who works with and builds with wood), at last, with tears
In his rough eyes, and told the captain he
Could do no more: he was a man in years,
And long had traveled through many a stormy sea,
And if he cried at length, they were not fears
That made his eyelids as a woman's be,
But he, poor fellow, had a wife and children,—
Two things for dying people quite confusing.

The ship was (based on facts and other evidence) settling now
Fast by the head; and, all honor/difference gone,
Some went to prayers again, and made a vow
Of candles to their saints—but there were none
To pay them with; and some looked over the bow;
Some lifted out the boats; and there was one
That begg'd Pedrillo for a (freeing from guilt or responsibility),
Who told him to be damned—in his confusion.

Some lash'd them in their (long pieces of cloth hung between two trees); some put on
Their best clothes, as if going to a fair;
Some cursed the day on which they saw the sun,
And grinded (teeth) their teeth, and, howling, tore their hair;
And others went on as they had begun,
Getting the boats out, being well aware
That a tight boat will live in a rough sea,
Unless with breakers close beneath her lee.

The worst of all was, that in their condition,
Having been (more than two, but not a lot of) days in great worry and depression,
It was very hard to get out such provision
As now might make/give their long suffering less:
Men, even when dying, dislike inanition;
Their stock was damaged by the weather's stress:
Two barrels of sweet baked snack and a keg of butter
Were all that could be thrown into the cutter.

But in the long-boat they planned to stow
Some pounds of bread, though hurt by the wet;
Water, a twenty-gallon barrel or so;
Six flasks of wine; and they planned to get
A part of/amount of their strengthen/improve from below,
And with a piece of pork, more than that, met,
But rare/not enough enough to serve them for a lunch/mid-day party—
Then there was rum, eight gallons in a (80-gallon barrel).

The other boats, the yawl and pinnace, had
Been stove in the beginning of the gale;
And the long-boat's condition was only bad,
As there were only two blankets for a sail,
And one oar for a mast, which a young lad
Threw in by good luck over the ship's rail;
And two boats could not hold, far less be stored,
To save one half the people then on board.

It was (the soft light just before sunrise or after sunset), and the sunless day went down
Over the waste of waters; like a cover,
Which, if withdrawn, would but tell (people) the frown
Of one whose hate is mask'd but to attack,
This way to their hopeless eyes the night was shown,
And seriously/sadly/terribly darkled over the faces pale,
And the dim lonely and empty deep: twelve days had Fear
Been their familiar, and now Death was here.

Some trial had been making at a raft,
With little hope in such a rolling sea,
A sort of thing at which one would have laugh'd,
If any laughter at such times could be,
Unless with people who too much have drink'd,
And have a kind of wild and terrible, scary happiness,
Half epileptical and half (very funny/wildly emotional):—
Their preservation would have been a miracle.

At half-past eight o'clock, booms, hencoops, fights,
And all things, for a chance, had been cast loose,
That still could keep floating the struggling tars,
For yet they tried, although of no great use:
There was no light in heaven but a few stars,
The boats put off overcrowded with their crews;
She gave a heel, and then a sudden movement to port,
And, going down head best—sunk, in short.

Then rose from sea to sky the wild goodbye—
Then shriek'd the shy, and stood still the brave,
Then some jumped overboard with terrible yell,
As eager to predict their grave;
And the sea yawn'd around her like a hell,
And down she sucked with her the whirling wave,
Like one who wrestles with his enemy,
And tries to to strangle him before he die.

And first one universal yell there rush'd,
Louder than the loud ocean, like a crash
Of echoing thunder; and then all was quieted,
Save the wild wind and the (without shame or guilt) dash
Of swells/waves; but at periods of time (or space) there gushed,
Along with a muscle-shaking splash,
A single/alone yell, the bubbling cry
Of some strong swimmer in his extreme pain.

The boats, as stated, had got off before,
And in them crowded (more than two, but not a lot of) of the crew;
And yet their present hope was hardly more
Than what it had been, for so strong it blew
There was small chance of reaching any shore;
And then they were too many, though so few—
Nine in the cutter, thirty in the boat,
Were counted in them when they got floating.

All the rest die/go bad'd; near two hundred souls
Had left their bodies; and what 's worse, (what a shame)!
When over Catholics the ocean rolls,
They must wait (more than two, but not a lot of) weeks before a mass
Takes off one peck of purgatorial coals,
Because, till people know what 's come to pass,
They won't lay out their money on the dead—
It costs three francs for every mass that 's said.

Juan got into the long-boat, and there
Planned to help Pedrillo to a place;
It seemed as if they had swapped/switched their care,
For Juan wore the (like a king or queen) face
Which courage gives, while poor Pedrillo's pair
Of eyes were crying for their owner's case:
Battista; though (a name called shortly Tita),
Was lost by getting at some aqua-vita.

Pedro, his valet, too, he tried to save,
But the same cause, good for his loss,
Left him so drunk, he jump'd into the wave
As over the cutter's edge he tried to cross,
And so he found a wine-and-watery grave;
They could not rescue him although so close,
Because the sea ran higher every minute,
And for the boat—the crew kept crowding in it.

A small old spaniel,—which had been Don Jose's,
His father's, whom he loved, as you may think,
For on such things the memory rests
With tenderness—stood howling on the edge,
Knowing (dogs have such thinking-related noses!),
No doubt, the ship was about to sink;
And Juan caught him up, and before he stepp'd
Off, threw him in, then after him he jumped.

He also stuff'd his money where he could
About his person, and Pedrillo's too,
Who let him do, in fact, whatever he would,
Not knowing what himself to say, or do,
As every rising wave his fear (of a terrible future) renewed;
But Juan, trusting they might still get through,
And thinking of/considering there were fixes (for diseases) for any ill,
This way re-got on (a plane or vehicle) his teacher and his spaniel.

It was a rough night, and blew so stiffly yet,
That the sail was calm'd between the seas,
Though on the wave's high top too much to set,
They dared not take it in for all the breeze:
Each sea curl'd over the (back part of a ship), and kept them wet,
And made them big package (of hay, etc.) without a moment's ease,
So that themselves as well as hopes were damp'd,
And the poor little cutter quickly swamp'd.

Nine souls more went in her: the long-boat still
Kept above water, with an oar for mast,
Two blankets stitch'd together, answering ill
Instead of sail, were to the oar made fast:
Though every wave roll'd menacing to fill,
And present danger all before gone past,
They suffered (from a loss) for those who die/go bad'd with the cutter,
And also for the sweet baked snack-barrels and butter.

The sun rose red and fiery, a sure sign
Of the (when something keeps happening for a long time/delay in a court case) of the strong wind: to run
Before the sea until it should grow fine,
Was all that for the present could be done:
A few tea-spoonfuls of their rum and wine
Were served out to the people, who begun
To faint, and damaged bread wet through the bags,
And most of them had little clothes but rags.

They counted thirty, crowded in a space
Which left rare/not enough room for movement or hard work;
They did their best to change their case,
One half satisfy up, though numb'd with the (placing underwater/surrounding someone with something),
While t'other half were laid down in their place
At watch and watch; this way, shaking (from fear or cold) like the tertian
The flu in its cold fit, they filled their boat,
With nothing but the sky for a great coat.

It is very certain the desire of life
Lengthens it: this is obvious to doctors,
When patients, neither diseased/badly harmed and bothered with friends nor wife,
Survive through very (without hope/very upset) conditions,
Because they still can hope, nor shines the knife
Nor shears of Atropos before their visions:
Feelings that there is no hope of all recovery spoils long life,
And makes men terrible troubles terrible troubles of upsetting shortness (of the number of words).

It is said that people living on regular payments
Are longer lived than others,—God knows why,
Unless to badly harm and bother the grantors,—yet so true it is,
That some, I really think, do never die;
Of any (companies that lend money) the worst a Jew it is,
And that 's their mode of furnishing supply:
In my young days they lent me cash that way,
Which I found very troublesome to pay.

It is this way with people in an open boat,
They live upon the love of life, and bear
More than can be believed, or even thought,
And stand like rocks the storm's wear and tear;
And suffering/difficult situation still has been the sailor's lot,
Since Noah's ark went cruising here and there;
She had a curious crew as well as (things carried by a ship, etc.),
Like the first old Greek privateer, the Argo.

But man is a meat-eating production,
And must have meals, at least one meal a day;
He cannot live, like woodcocks, upon suction,
But, like the shark and tiger, must have (related to hunting);
Although his (related to body structure) construction
Bears vegetables, in a quietly complaining way,
Your working people think beyond all question,
Beef, veal, and mutton, better for digestion.

And so it was with this our unlucky crew;
For on the third day there came on a calm,
And though at first their strength it might renew,
And lying on their extreme tiredness like helping medicine,
Lull'd them like turtles sleeping on the blue
Of ocean, when they woke they felt a fear,
And fell all extremely hungrily on their provision,
Instead of collecting (and holding on to) it with due (high) quality.

The result was easily predicted—
They ate up all they had, and drank their wine,
In spite of all objections/criticisms, and then
On what, in fact, next day were they to dine?
They hoped the wind would rise, these foolish men!
And carry them to shore; these hopes were fine,
But as they had only one oar, and that easily broken,
It would have been more wise to save their food.

The fourth day came, but not a breath of air,
And Ocean slumber'd like an unwean'd child:
The fifth day, and their boat lay floating there,
The sea and sky were blue, and clear, and mild—
With their one oar (I wish they had had a pair)
What could they do? and hunger's extreme anger grew wild:
So Juan's spaniel, spite of his begging,
Was killed and portion'd out for present eating.

On the sixth day they fed upon his hide,
And Juan, who had still refused, because
The creature was his father's dog that died,
Now feeling all the (bird that eats dead animals) in his jaws,
With some shame and guilt received (though first denied)
As a great favour one of the fore-paws,
Which he divided with Pedrillo, who
Eat/destroy'd it, badly wanting the other too.

The seventh day, and no wind—the burning sun
Blister'd and burn'd, and, unmoving (in a bad way) on the sea,
They lay like dead bodies; and hope was none,
Save in the breeze that came not; terribly
They angrily stared upon each other—all was done,
Water, and wine, and food,—and you might see
The wishings of the person (who eats people) arise
(Although they did not speak) in their wolfish eyes.

Eventually one whisper'd his companion, who
Whisper'd another, and so it went round,
And then into a rougher-sounding whisper grew,
A scary, and wild, and (without hope/very upset) sound;
And when his friend's thought each sufferer knew,
It was but his own, hold down and stop'd till now, he found:
And out they spoke of lots for flesh and blood,
And who should die to be his fellow's food.

But before they came to this, they that day shared
Some (made of leather) caps, and what remained of shoes;
And then they looked around them and feelings that there is no hope'd,
And none to be the sacrifice would choose;
Eventually the lots were torn up, and prepared,
But of materials that much shock the Muse—
Having no paper, for the lack of better,
They took by force from Juan Julia's letter.

The lots were made, and marked, and mixed, and handed,
In silent horror, and their distribution
Lull'd even the animal-like hunger which demanded,
Like the Promethean (bird that eats dead animals), this pollution;
None in particular had searched for/tried to get or plann'd it,
It was nature chew'd them to this resolution,
By which none were permitted to be neuter—
And the lot fell on Juan's unlucky teacher.

He but requested to be bled to death:
The doctor (that operates on people) had his tools, and bled
Pedrillo, and so gently ebb'd his breath,
You hardly could perceive when he was dead.
He died as born, a Catholic in faith,
Like most in the belief in which they 're raised/trained,
And first a little crucifix he kissed,
And then held out his throat-related and wrist.

The doctor (that operates on people), as there was no other fee,
Had his first choice of little pieces for his pains;
But being thirstiest at the moment, he
Preferr'd a draught from the fast-flowing veins:
Part was divided, part thrown in the sea,
And such things as the (the guts or insides of a person, animal, or machine) and the brains
Gave/entertained two sharks, who followed over the wave in the wind—
The sailors ate the rest of poor Pedrillo.

The sailors ate him, all save three or four,
Who were not quite so fond of animal food;
To these was added Juan, who, before
Refusing his own spaniel, hardly could
Feel now his (desire to eat/desire for something) increased much more;
It was not to be expected that he should,
Even in extremity of their disaster,
Dine with them on his pastor and his master.

It was better that he did not; for, in fact,
The result was awful in the extreme;
For they, who were most extremely hungry in the act,
Went screaming and acting violently mad—Lord! how they did insult God!
And foam and roll, with strange (powerful, scary muscle jerking) rack'd,
Drinking salt water like a mountain-stream,
Tearing, and grinning, howling, screeching, swearing,
And, with hyaena-laughter, died desperate.

Their numbers were much thinn'd by this causing,
And all the rest were thin enough, Heaven knows;
And some of them had lost their memory,
Happier than they who still perceived their troubles;
But others thought carefully about on a new cutting apart,
As if not warn'd (good or well enough) by those
Who had already die/go bad'd, suffering madly,
For having used their (desires to eat/desires for things) so sadly.

And next they thought upon the master's mate,
As fattest; but he saved himself, because,
Besides being much disliking from such a (the) unavoidable, already-decided future,
There were some other reasons: the first was,
He had been rather (sick/unwilling) of late;
And that which mostly proved his saving clause
Was a small present made to him at Cadiz,
By general subscription of the ladies.

Of poor Pedrillo something still remained,
But was used (only a little bit),—some were afraid,
And others still their (desires to eat/desires for things) held back,
Or but at times a little supper made;
All except Juan, who throughout stopped,
Chewing a piece of fast-growing plant/wood and some lead:
Eventually they caught two boobies and a dummy,
And then they left off eating the dead body.

And if Pedrillo's (the) unavoidable, already-decided future should shocking be,
Remember Ugolino talk down tos
To eat the head of his most hated and oldest enemy
The moment after he politely ends
His story: if enemies be food in hell, at sea
It is surely fair to dine upon our friends,
When shipwreck's short (sum of money given/freedom to move within limits) grows too very small,
Without being much more (very bad and upsetting) than Dante.

And the same night there fell a shower of rain,
For which their mouths stared, like the cracks of earth
When dried to summer dust; till taught by pain
Men really do not know what good water 's worth;
If you had been in Turkey or in Spain,
Or with a starve'd boat's-crew had your (space for a ship to move or park)/(place to sleep),
Or in the desert heard the camel's bell,
You 'd wish yourself where Truth is—in a well.

It poured down huge amounts, but they were no richer
Until they found a ragged piece of sheet,
Which served them as a sort of spongy pitcher,
And when they thought of/considered its moisture was complete
They wrung it out, and though a thirsty ditcher
Might not have thought the very small draught so sweet
As a full pot of porter, to their thinking
They never till now had known the joys of drinking.

And their baked lips, with many a bloody crack,
Sucked in the moisture, which like nectar stream'd;
Their throats were ovens, their swollen tongues were black,
As the rich man's in hell, who selfishly/unsuccessfully scream'd
To beg the poor person (who asks for money), who could not rain back
A drop of dew, when every drop had seemed
To taste of heaven—If this be true, in fact
Some Christians have a comfortable religious belief.

There were two fathers in this terrible crew,
And with them their two sons, of whom the one
Was more strong and healthy and tough and strong to the view,
But he died early; and when he was gone,
His nearest messmate told his sire, who threw
One quick look at him, and said, 'Heaven's will be done!
I can do nothing,' and he saw him thrown
Into the deep without a tear or groan.

The other father had a weaklier child,
Of a soft cheek and aspect delicate;
But the boy bore up long, and with a mild
And patient spirit held uninterested his unavoidable future;
Little he said, and now and then he smiled,
As if to win a part from off the weight
He saw increasing on his father's heart,
With the deep deadly thought that they must part.

And over him bent his sire, and never raised
His eyes from off his face, but wiped the foam
From his pale lips, and ever on him looked,
And when the wished-for shower at length was come,
And the boy's eyes, which the dull film half glazed,
Brighten'd, and for a moment seemed to roam,
He squeezed from out a rag some drops of rain
Into his dying child's mouth—but without success (or without purpose).

The boy expired—the father held the clay,
And looked upon it long, and when at last
Death left no doubt, and the dead heavy load lay
Stiff on his heart, and pulse and hope were past,
He watched it sadly, until away
It was carried/held by the rude wave (in which/during which/in what way/in what) 't was cast;
Then he himself sunk down all dumb and shaking (from fear or cold),
And gave no sign of life, save his limbs shaking (in fear).

Now overhead a rainbow, bursting through
The scattering clouds, shone, spanning the dark sea,
Resting its bright base on the shaking (in fear) blue;
And all within its arch appeared to be
Clearer than that without, and its wide hue
Wax'd broad and waving, like a flag free,
Then changed like to a bow that 's bent, and then
(gave up/forever walked away from) the dim eyes of these shipwreck'd men.

It changed, of course; a heavenly (animal that changes its colors to match the background),
The (cheerful and full of fresh air) child of vapour and the sun,
Created in purple, cradled in dark red,
Baptized in (hot) liquid gold, and wrapped in demand payment/gray,
Shining and twinkling (like jewelry) like crescents over a Turk's pavilion,
And blending every colour into one,
Just like a black eye in a recent fight
(For sometimes we must box without the sound-blocking device).

Our shipwreck'd seamen thought it a good sign of the future—
It is as well to think so, now and then;
It was an old custom of the Greek and Roman,
And may become of great advantage when
Folks are discouraged; and most surely no men
Had greater need to nerve themselves again
Than these, and so this rainbow looked like hope—
Quite a heavenly machine (that shows lots of colors).

About this time a beautiful white bird,
Webfooted, not unlike a dove in size
And fancy feathers (probably it might have (made a mistake)
Upon its course), passed often before their eyes,
And tried to sit (like a bird), although it saw and heard
The men within the boat, and in this disguise
It came and went, and flap wings/move unsteadily'd round them till
Night fell: this seemed a better (bad sign of the future) still.

But in this case I also must remark,
It was well this bird of promise did not perch,
Because the tackle of our broken bark
Was not so safe for roosting as a church;
And had it been the dove from Noah's ark,
Returning there from her successful search,
Which in their way that moment accidentally happened to fall,
They would have eat her, olive-branch and all.

With (the soft light just before sunrise or after sunset) it again came on to blow,
But not with violence; the stars shone out,
The boat made way; yet now they were so low,
They did not know where nor what they were about;
Some imagined they saw land, and some said 'No!'
The frequent fog-banks gave them cause to doubt—
Some swore that they heard breakers, others guns,
And all mistook about the last thing just mentioned once.

As morning broke, the light wind died away,
When he who had the watch sung out and swore,
If it was not land that rose with the sun's ray,
He wished that land he never might see more;
And the rest rubb'd their eyes and saw a bay,
Or thought they saw, and shaped their course for shore;
For shore it was, and slowly grew
Clear/separate, and high, and real to view.

And then of these some part burst into tears,
And others, looking with a stupid stare,
Could not yet separate their hopes from fears,
And seemed as if they had no further care;
While a few prayed (the first time for some years)—
And at the bottom of the boat three were
Asleep: they shook them by the hand and head,
And tried to awaken them, but found them dead.

The day before, fast sleeping on the water,
They found a turtle of the hawk's-bill kind,
And by luck, gliding softly, caught her,
Which produced/gave up a day's life, and to their mind
Proved even still a more nutritious matter,
Because it left encouragement behind:
They thought that in such dangers, more than chance
Had sent them this for their (rescue from harm/escape from evil).

The land appeared a high and rocky coast,
And higher grew the mountains as they drew,
Set by a current, toward it: they were lost
In different educated guesses, for none knew
To what part of the earth they had been tost,
So changeable had been the winds that blew;
Some thought it was Mount AEtna, some the highlands,
Of Candia, Cyprus, Rhodes, or other islands.

Meantime the current, with a rising strong wind,
Still set them onwards to the welcome shore,
Like Charon's bark of ghosts/terrible things, dull and pale:
Their living freight was now reduced to four,
And three dead, whom their strength could not get/help
To lift up/throw (something heavy) into the deep with those before,
Though the two sharks still followed them, and dashed
The spray into their faces as they splash'd.

Widespread death from starving, feelings that there is no hope, cold, thirst, and heat, had done
Their work on them by turns, and thinn'd them to
Such things a mother had not known her son
In the middle of the skeletons of that very thin crew;
By night chill'd, by day burn'd, this way one by one
They die/go bad'd, until shrunk and died to these few,
But mostly by a species of self-murder,
In washing down Pedrillo with salt water.

As they drew near the land, which now was seen
Unequal in its aspect here and there,
They felt the freshness of its growing green,
That waved in forest-tops, and smooth'd the air,
And fell upon their glazed eyes like a screen
From wet and shiny waves, and skies so hot and bare—
Lovely seemed any object that should sweep
Away the huge, salt, fear (of a terrible future), never-ending deep.

The shore looked wild, without a trace of man,
And girt by difficult/impressively strong waves; but they
Were mad for land, and so their course they ran,
Though right ahead the roaring breakers lay:
A reef between them also now began
To show its boiling surf and bounding spray,
But finding no place for their landing better,
They ran the boat for shore,—and overset her.

But in his native stream, the Guadalquivir,
Juan to wash his young limbs was (usual desire);
And having learned to swim in that sweet river,
Had often turned the art to some account:
A better swimmer you could rare/not enough see ever,
He could, maybe, have passed the Hellespont,
As once (a feat on which ourselves we prided)
Leander, Mr. Ekenhead, and I did.

So here, though faint, shockingly skinny, and (complete/harsh/simple),
He help/support'd his boyish limbs, and tried to ply
With the quick wave, and gain, before it was dark,
The beach which lay before him, high and dry:
The greatest danger here was from a shark,
That carried off his neighbour by the thigh;
As for the other two, they could not swim,
So nobody arrived on shore but him.

Nor yet had he arrived but for the oar,
Which, (in a lucky way) for him, was washed
Just as his weak arms could strike no more,
And the hard wave overwhelm'd him as it was dashed
Within his grab/understand; he clung to it, and sore
The waters beat while he thereto was lash'd;
At last, with swimming, wading, moving (quickly)/mixing up, he
Roll'd on the beach, half-for no reason/unconscious, from the sea:

There, (having difficulty breathing/very nervous or worried), with his digging nails he clung
Fast to the sand, (because of fear that the following will happen:) the returning wave,
From whose (full of doubt and hesitation) roar his life he wrung,
Should suck him back to her insatiate (place where a body is buried):
And there he lay, full length, where he was thrown,
Before the entrance of a cliff-worn cave,
With just enough of life to feel its pain,
And think of/consider that it was saved, maybe without success (or without purpose).

With slow and walking very unsteadily (or huge) effort he rose up,
But sunk again upon his bleeding knee
And shaking (in fear) hand; and then he looked for those
Who long had been his mates upon the sea;
But none of them appeared to share his troubles,
Save one, a dead body, from out the starve'd three,
Who died two days before, and now had found
An unknown (nothing good exists) beach for burial ground.

And as he looked, his (feeling like you're spinning around and almost falling) brain spun fast,
And down he sunk; and as he sunk, the sand
Swam round and round, and all his senses passed:
He fell upon his side, and his stretched hand
Drooped dripping on the oar (their jurymast),
And, like a shrunk and died lily, on the land
His thin frame and pale aspect lay,
As fair a thing as ever was form'd of clay.

How long in his damp trance young Juan lay
He did not know, for the earth was gone for him,
And Time had nothing more of night nor day
For his solidifying blood, and senses dim;
And how this heavy faintness passed away
He did not know, till each painful pulse and limb,
And tingling vein, seemed beating back to life,
For Death, though defeated, still retired with battle(s)/tension.

His eyes he opened, shut, again open,
For all was doubt and (feeling of spinning around and almost falling); he thought
He still was in the boat and had only slept,
And felt again with his feelings that there is no hope overwrought,
And wished it death in which he had rested;
And then once more his feelings back were brought,
And slowly by his swimming eyes was seen
A lovely female face of seventeen.

It was bending dose over his, and the small mouth
Seemed almost prying into his for breath;
And rubbing together/irritating him, the soft warm hand of youth
Recall'd his answering spirits back from death;
And, washing/swimming his chill temples, tried to comfort
Each pulse to animation, till beneath
Its gentle touch and shaking (with fear or emotion) care, a sigh
To these kind efforts made a low reply.

Then was the friendly poured, and mantle threw/thrown
Around his scarce-covered limbs; and the fair arm
Raised higher the faint head which over it hung;
And her clear/open and honest cheek, all total/totally/with nothing else mixed in and warm,
Pillow'd his death-like forehead; then she wrung
His wet (like grass at sunrise) curls, long drench'd by every storm;
And watched with eagerness each throb that drew
A sigh from his deeply breathed bosom—and hers, too.

And lifting him with care into the cave,
The gentle girl and her associated,—one
Young, yet her older (person), and of brow less grave,
And more strong and healthy of figure,—then begun
To set on fire/start fire, and as the new flames gave
Light to the rocks that roof'd them, which the sun
Had never seen, the maid, or whatsoe'er
She was, appeared clear/separate, and tall, and fair.

Her brow was overhung with coins of gold,
That sparkled over the reddish-brown of her hair—
Her clustering hair, whose longer locks were roll'd
In braids behind; and though her height were
Even of the highest for a female mold,
They nearly reached her heel; and in her air
There was a something which custom-made/clearly showed command,
As one who was a lady in the land.

Her hair, I said, was reddish-brown; but her eyes
Were black as death, their lashes the same color,
Of down-looking length, in whose silk shadow lies
Deepest attraction; for when to the view
Forward from its raven fringe the full quick look flies,
Never with such force the fastest arrow flew;
It is as the snake late coiled, who pours his length,
And throws at once his poison/hate and his strength.

Her brow was white and low, her cheek's total/totally/with nothing else mixed in dye
Like (the soft light just before sunrise or after sunset) wonderful still with the set sun;
Short upper lip—sweet lips! that make us sigh
Ever to have seen such; for she was one
Fit for the model of a statues
(A race of mere people (who pretend to be someone else), when all 's done—
I 've seen much finer women, ripe and real,
Than all the nonsense of their stone ideal).

I 'll tell you why I say so, for it is just
One should not rail without a decent cause:
There was an Irish lady, to whose bust
I never saw justice done, and yet she was
A frequent model; and if ever she must
Yield to serious/severe Time and Nature's wrinkling laws,
They will destroy a face which mortal thought
Never compass'd, nor less mortal chisel created/formed.

And such was she, the lady of the cave:
Her dress was very different from the Spanish,
Simpler, and yet of colours not so very bad/very serious;
For, as you know, the Spanish women kick out
Bright hues when out of doors, and yet, while wave
Around them (what I hope will never disappear)
The basquina and the mantilla, they
Seem at the same time magical and mysterious and gay.

But with our woman this was not the case:
Her dress was many-colour'd, finely spun;
Her locks curl'd irresponsibly round her face,
But through them gold and gems (very much) shone:
Her girdle sparkled, and the richest lace
Flow'd in her cover, and many a (very valuable/very dearly loved) stone
Flash'd on her little hand; but, what was shocking,
Her small snow feet had slippers, but no stocking.

The other female's dress was not unlike,
But of inferior materials: she
Had not so many decorations to strike,
Her hair had silver only, bound to be
Her property (a woman brings to a marriage); and her cover, in form alike,
Was rougher; and her air, though firm, less free;
Her hair was thicker, but less long; her eyes
As black, but quicker, and of smaller size.

And these two tended him, and cheer'd him both
With food and clothes, and those soft attentions,
Which are (as I must own) of female growth,
And have ten thousand delicate inventions:
They made a most superior mess of broth,
A thing which poetry but almost never talks about/says,
But the best dish that ever was cook'd since Homer's
Achilles ordered dinner for new comers.

I 'll tell you who they were, this female pair,
(because of fear that the following will happen:) they should seem princesses in disguise;
Besides, I hate all mystery, and that air
Of clap-trap which your recent poets prize;
And so, in short, the girls they really were
They will appear before your curious eyes,
Mistress and maid; the first was only daughter
Of an old man who lived upon the water.

A fisherman he had been in his youth,
And still a sort of fisherman was he;
But other guesses were, in truth,
Added to his connection with the sea,
Maybe not so respectable, in truth:
A little proud and snobbygling, and some piracy,
Left him, at last, the sole of many masters
Of an illegally obtained million of piastres.

A fisher, therefore, was he,—though of men,
Like Peter the Apostle,—and he fish'd
For wandering (person who sells things)-vessels, now and then,
And sometimes caught as many as he wished;
The (things carried by a ship, etc.)es he taken (to stop illegal activity), and gain
He searched for/tried to get in the slave-market too, and dish'd
Full many a little piece for that Turkish trade,
By which, no doubt, a good deal may be made.

He was a Greek, and on his isle had built
(One of the wild and smaller Cyclades)
A very attractive house from out his guilt,
And there he lived very at ease;
Heaven knows what cash he got or blood he spilled,
A sad old fellow was he, if you please;
But this I know, it was a big building,
Full of shockingly cruel carving, paint, and covering in gold.

He had an only daughter, called Haidee,
The greatest heiress of the Eastern Isles;
Besides, so very beautiful was she,
Her property (a woman brings to a marriage) was as nothing to her smiles:
Still in her teens, and like a lovely tree
She grew to womanhood, and between whiles
Rejected (more than two, but not a lot of) romantic interests, just to learn
How to accept a better in his turn.



And walking out upon the beach, below
The cliff, towards sunset, on that day she found,
Emotionally cold,—not dead, but nearly so,—
Don Juan, almost starve'd, and half drowned;
But being naked, she was shock'd, you know,
Yet thought of/considered herself in common pity bound,
As far as in her lay, 'to take him in,
A stranger' dying, with so white a skin.

But taking him into her father's house
Was not exactly the best way to save,
But like bringing across to the cat the mouse,
Or people in a trance into their very bad/very serious;
Because the good old man had so much 'nous,'
Unlike the honest Arab thieves so brave,
He would have nicely (to guests) cured the stranger,
And sold him instantly when out of danger.

And therefore, with her maid, she thought it best
(A virgin always on her maid relies)
To place him in the cave for present rest:
And when, at last, he opened his black eyes,
Their (generous kindness/organization that helps people) increased about their guest;
And their kindness grew to such a size,
It opened half the toll highway-gates to heaven
(St. Paul says, it is the toll which must be given).

They made a fire,—but such a fire as they
Upon the moment could plan with such
Materials as were cast up round the bay,—
Some broken planks, and oars, that to the touch
Were nearly (things used to start a fire, like twigs, etc.), since so long they lay
A mast was almost crumbled to a crutch;
But, by God's grace, here wrecks were in such plenty,
That there was fuel to have furnish'd twenty.

He had a bed of furs, and a pelisse,
For Haidee stripped her sables off to make
His couch; and, that he might be more at ease,
And warm, in case by chance he should awake,
They also gave a petticoat each,
She and her maid—and promised by (sunrise time)
To pay him a fresh visit, with a dish
For breakfast, of eggs, coffee, bread, and fish.

And so they left him to his (single/alone) rest:
Juan slept like a top, or like the dead,
Who sleep at last, maybe (God only knows),
Just for the present; and in his lull'd head
Not even a vision of his former troubles
Throbb'd in evil dreams, which sometimes spread
Not wanted visions of our former years,
Till the eye, cheated, opens thick with tears.

Young Juan slept all dreamless:—but the maid,
Who smooth'd his pillow, as she left the den
Looked back upon him, and a moment stayed,
And turned, believing that he called again.
He slumber'd; yet she thought, at least she said
(The heart will slip, even as the tongue and pen),
He had said her name—but she forgot
That at this moment Juan knew it not.

And thoughtful to her father's house she went,
Ordering/prohibiting silence strict to Zoe, who
Better than her knew what, in fact, she meant,
She being wiser by a year or two:
A year or two 's an age when rightly spent,
And Zoe spent hers, as most women do,
In gaining all that useful sort of knowledge
Which is got/gained in Nature's good old college.

The morning broke, and found Juan sleeping still
Fast in his cave, and nothing clash'd upon
His rest; the rushing of the neighbouring rill,
And the young (lines of light) of the left out/kept out sun,
Troubled him not, and he might sleep his fill;
And need he had of sleep yet, for none
Had suffer'd more—his difficult situations were (serving to compare two or more things)
To those related in my grand-dad's 'Narrative.'

Not so Haidee: she sadly tossed and tumbled,
And started from her sleep, and, turning over
Dreamed of a thousand wrecks, over which she (tripped while walking/made a mistake),
And attractive dead bodies threw upon the shore;
And woke her maid so early that she quietly complained,
And called her father's old slaves up, who swore
In (more than two, but not a lot of) promises—Armenian, Turk, and Greek—
They did not know what to think of such a freak.

But up she got, and up she made them get,
With some dishonesty/pretending about the sun, that makes
Sweet skies just when he rises, or is set;
And it is, no doubt, a sight to see when breaks
Bright Phoebus, while the mountains still are wet
With mist, and every bird with him awakes,
And night is thrown off like a suffering (in sadness) suit
Worn for a husband,—or some other animal.

I say, the sun is a most beautiful sight,
I 've seen him rise full often, in fact of late
I have sat up on purpose all the night,
Which hurrys, as doctors say, one's (the) unavoidable, already-decided future;
And so all you, who would be in the right
In health and purse, begin your day to date
From (sunrise time), and when coffin'd at eighty,
Write upon the plate, you rose at four.

And Haidee met the morning face to face;
Her own was freshest, though a feverish flush
Had dyed it with the rushed blood, whose race
From heart to cheek is curb'd into a blush,
Like to a huge amount which a mountain's base,
That overpowers some Mountain-related river's rush,
Checks to a lake, whose waves in circles spread;
Or the Red Sea—but the sea is not red.

And down the cliff the island virgin came,
And near the cave her quick light footsteps drew,
While the sun smiled on her with his first flame,
And young Aurora kissed her lips with dew,
Taking her for a sister; just the same
Mistake you would have made on seeing the two,
Although the mortal, quite as fresh and fair,
Had all the advantage, too, of not being air.

And when into the cave Haidee stepp'd
All shyly, yet quickly, she saw
That like an infant Juan sweetly slept;
And then she stopped, and stood as if in awe
(For sleep is awful), and on tiptoe walked (slowly and quietly)
And wrapped him closer, (because of fear that the following will happen:) the air, too raw,
Should reach his blood, then over him still as death
Bent with quieted lips, that drank his scarce-drawn breath.

And so like to an angel over the dying
Who die in moral rightness, she lean'd; and there
All peacefully the shipwreck'd boy was lying,
As over him the calm and stirless air:
But Zoe the meantime some eggs was frying,
Since, after all, no doubt the young pair
Must breakfast—and betimes, (because of fear that the following will happen:) they should ask it,
She drew out her provision from the basket.

She knew that the best feelings must have food,
And that a shipwreck'd youth would hungry be;
Besides, being less in love, she yawn'd a little,
And felt her veins chill'd by the neighbouring sea;
And so, she cook'd their breakfast to a tittle;
I can't say that she gave them any tea,
But there were eggs, fruit, coffee, bread, fish, honey,
With Scio wine,—and all for love, not money.

And Zoe, when the eggs were ready, and
The coffee made, would, with pleasure, have waken'd Juan;
But Haidee stopped her with her quick small hand,
And without word, a sign her finger drew on
Her lip, which Zoe needs must understand;
And, the first breakfast spoiled, prepared a new one,
Because her mistress would not let her break
That sleep which seemed as it would never awake.

For still he lay, and on his thin worn cheek
A purple very busy played like dying day
On the snow-tops of distant hills; the streak
Of suffering yet upon his forehead lay,
Where the blue veins looked dark/sneaky, shrunk, and weak;
And his black curls were wet (like grass at sunrise) with the spray,
Which weighed upon them yet, all damp and salt,
Mixed with the stony vapours of the vault.

And she bent over him, and he lay beneath,
Quieted as the babe upon its mother's breast,
Drooped as the willow when no winds can breathe,
Lull'd like the depth of ocean when at rest,
Fair as the crowning rose of the whole wreath,
Soft as the inexperienced cygnet in its nest;
In short, he was a very pretty fellow,
Although his troubles had turned him rather yellow.

He woke and looked, and would have slept again,
But the fair face which met his eyes (ordered that someone not do something/ordered that something not happen)
Those eyes to close, though extreme tiredness and pain
Had further sleep a further pleasure made;
For woman's face was never form'd without success (or without purpose)
For Juan, so that even when he prayed
He turned from terrible and scary saints, and (people who die or suffer a lot rather than give up what they believe in) hairy,
To the sweet portraits of the Virgin Mary.

And so upon his elbow he rose up,
And looked upon the lady, in whose cheek
The pale dealt with the purple rose,
As with an effort she began to speak;
Her eyes were very well-spoken/very well-written, her words would present/ask/stand in a showy and fake way,
Although she told him, in good modern Greek,
With an Ionian (special way of speaking/mark that shows emphasis), low and sweet,
That he was faint, and must not talk, but eat.

Now Juan could not understand a word,
Being no Grecian; but he had an ear,
And her voice was the bird-like song of a bird,
So soft, so sweet, so delicately clear,
That finer, simpler music never was heard;
The sort of sound we echo with a tear,
Without knowing why—an overpowering tone,
From where Melody lowers/moves downward/originates as from a (seat of power of a king or queen).

And Juan looked as one who is awoke
By a distant organ, doubting if he be
Not yet a dreamer, till the spell is broke
By the watchman, or some such reality,
Or by one's early valet's cursed knock;
At least it is a heavy sound to me,
Who like a morning slumber—for the night
Shows stars and women in a better light.

And Juan, too, was help'd out from his dream,
Or sleep, or whatso'er it was, by feeling
A most huge (amounts of) (desire to eat/desire for something): the steam
Of Zoe's cookery no doubt was stealing
Upon his senses, and the firewood-related beam
Of the new fire, which Zoe kept up, kneeling
To stir her food, made him quite awake
And long for food, but mostly a beef-steak.

But beef is rare within these oxless isles;
Goat's flesh there is, no doubt, and kid, and mutton;
And, when a holiday upon them smiles,
A joint upon their extremely cruel and animal-like spits they put on:
But this happens but almost never, between whiles,
For some of these are rocks with hardly a hut on;
Others are fair and life-giving, among which
This, though not large, was one of the most rich.

I say that beef is rare, and can't help thinking
That the old story of the Minotaur—
From which our modern morals rightly shrinking
Strongly criticize the royal lady's taste who wore
A cow's shape for a mask—was only (sinking
The symbolic story) only a little type, no more,
That Pasiphae (helped increase/showed in a good way) breeding (cows, bulls, etc.),
To make the Cretans bloodier in fight.

For we all know that English people are
Fed upon beef—I won't say much of beer,
Because it is liquor only, and being far
From this my subject, has no business here;
We know, too, they very fond of war,
A pleasure—like all pleasures—rather dear;
So were the Cretans—from which I infer
That beef and fights both were because of her.

But to resume. The tired and slow Juan raised
His head upon his elbow, and he saw
A sight on which he had not lately looked,
As all his latter meals had been quite raw,
Three or four things, for which the Lord he praised,
And, feeling still the starve'd (bird that eats dead animals) chew,
He fell upon whatever was offered, like
A priest, a shark, a politician, or pike.

He ate, and he was well supplied: and she,
Who watched him like a mother, would have fed
Him past all bounds, because she smiled to see
Such (desire to eat/desire for something) in one she had thought of/considered dead;
But Zoe, being older than Haidee,
Knew (by tradition, for she never had read)
That starve'd people must be slowly nurst,
And fed by spoonfuls, else they always burst.

And so she took the freedom to state,
Rather by deeds than words, because the case
Was extremely important, that the gentleman, whose fate
Had made her mistress quit her bed to trace
The sea-shore at this hour, must leave his plate,
Unless he wished to die upon the place—
She grabbed it, and refused another little piece,
Saying, he had stuffed (with food) enough to make a horse ill.

Next they—he being naked, save a tattered
Pair of rare/not enough decent trowsers—went to work,
And in the fire his recent rags they scatter'd,
And dress'd him, for the present, like a Turk,
Or Greek—that is, although it not much matter'd,
Leaving out turban, slippers, pistols, dirk,—
They furnish'd him, whole, except some stitches,
With a clean shirt, and very big pants.

And then fair Haidee tried her tongue at speaking,
But not a word could Juan understand,
Although he listened so that the young Greek in
Her serious honesty would never have made an end;
And, as he interrupted not, went eking
Her speech out to her student and friend,
Till pausing at the last her breath to take,
She saw he did not understand Romaic.

And then she had access to help to nods, and signs,
And smiles, and sparkles of the speaking eye,
And read (the only book she could) the lines
Of his fair face, and found, by sympathy,
The answer very well-spoken/very well-written, where soul shines
And darts in one quick quick look a long reply;
And so in every look she saw exprest
A world of words, and things at which she guess'd.

And now, because of the effort of fingers and of eyes,
And words repeated after her, he took
A lesson in her tongue; but by guess,
No doubt, less of her language than her look:
As he who studies (in an emotionally intense way) the skies
Turns oftener to the stars than to his book,
This way Juan learned his alpha beta better
From Haidee's quick look than any written/carved/sculptured letter.

It is pleasing to be school'd in a strange tongue
By female lips and eyes—that is, I mean,
When both the teacher and the taught are young,
As was the case, at least, where I have been;
They smile so when one 's right, and when one 's wrong
They smile still more, and then there get involved/help
Pressure of hands, maybe even a (not involved with sex or sex-related things) kiss;—
I learned the little that I know by this:

That is, some words of Spanish, Turk, and Greek,
Italian not at all, having no teachers;
Much English I cannot pretend to speak,
Learning that language mostly from its preachers,
Barrow, South, Tillotson, whom every week
I study, also Blair, the highest reachers
Of ability to speak clearly and beautifully in religiousness and prose—
I hate your poets, so read none of those.

As for the ladies, I have nothing to say,
A wanderer from the British world of fashion,
Where I, like other 'dogs, have had my day,'
Like other men, too, may have had my passion—
But that, like other things, has passed away,
And all her fools whom I could lay the whip on:
Enemies, friends, men, women, now are nothing to me
But dreams of what has been, no more to be.

Return we to Don Juan. He begun
To hear new words, and to repeat them; but
Some feelings, universal as the sun,
Were such as could not in his breast be shut
More than within the chest of a nun:
He was in love,—as you would be, no doubt,
With a young benefactress,—so was she,
Just in the way we very often see.

And every day by (sunrise time)—rather early
For Juan, who was somewhat fond of rest—
She came into the cave, but it was only
To see her bird resting in his nest;
And she would softly stir his locks so curly,
Without disturbing her yet sleeping guest,
Breathing all gently over his cheek and mouth,
As over a bed of roses the sweet south.

And every morning his colour freshlier came,
And every day help'd on his time of getting better;
It was well, because health in the human frame
Is pleasant, besides being true love's (basic, built-in, important qualities/scent),
For health and (state of doing nothing or having nothing to do) to passion's flame
Are oil and gunpowder; and some good lessons
Are also learned from Ceres and from Bacchus,
Without whom Venus will not long attack us.

While Venus fills the heart (without heart really
Love, though good always, is not quite so good),
Ceres presents a plate of vermicelli,—
For love must be sustain'd like flesh and blood,—
While Bacchus pours out wine, or hands a jelly:
Eggs, oysters, too, are loving food;
But who is their supplier from above
Heaven knows,—it may be Neptune, Pan, or Jove.

When Juan woke he found some good things ready,
A bath, a breakfast, and the finest eyes
That ever made a young heart less steady,
Besides her maid's as pretty for their size;
But I have spoken of all this already—
And repetition 's boring and annoying and unwise,—
Well—Juan, after washing/swimming in the sea,
Came always back to coffee and Haidee.

Both were so young, and one so innocent,
That washing/swimming passed for nothing; Juan seemed
To her, as it were, the kind of being sent,
Of whom these two years she had nightly dreamed,
A something to be loved, a creature meant
To be her happiness, and whom she thought of/considered
To make/give happy; all who joy would win
Must share it,—Happiness was born a twin.

It was such pleasure to look at him, such
Enlargement of existence to (take part of something/join others as they do something)
Nature with him, to thrill beneath his touch,
To watch him sleeping, and to see him wake:
To live with him forever were too much;
But then the thought of parting made her shake/earthquake;
He was her own, her ocean-treasure, cast
Like a rich wreck—her first love, and her last.

And so a moon roll'd on, and fair Haidee
Paid daily visits to her boy, and took
Such (existing in very large amounts) (steps taken to prevent trouble or injury), that still he
Remained unknown within his rough and rocky nook;
At last her father's prows put out to sea
For certain (person who sells things)men upon the look,
Not as of a long time ago to carry off an Io,
But three Ragusan vessels, bound for Scio.

Then came her freedom, for she had no mother,
So that, her father being at sea, she was
Free as a married woman, or such other
Female, as where she likes may freely pass,
Without even the heavy load (that slows you down) of a brother,
The freest she that ever looked on glass;
I speak of Christian lands in this comparison,
Where wives, at least, are almost never kept in fort.

Now she prolong'd her visits and her talk
(For they must talk), and he had learned to say
So much as to propose to take a walk,—
For little had he wander'd since the day
On which, like a young flower snapp'd from the stalk,
Drooping and wet (like grass at sunrise) on the beach he lay,—
And so they walked out in the afternoon,
And saw the sun set opposite the moon.

It was a wild and breaker-beaten coast,
With cliffs above, and a broad sandy shore,
Guarded by shallow-water areas and rocks as by an host,
With here and there a creek, whose aspect wore
A better welcome to the storm-tost;
And rarely stopped the snobby wave in the wind's roar,
Save on the dead long summer days, which make
The outstretch'd ocean (shiny, twinkling substance) like a lake.

And the small ripple spilled upon the beach
Hardly overpass'd the cream of your bubbly wine,
When over the brim the sparkling bumpers reach,
That spring-dew of the spirit! the heart's rain!
Few things go past old wine; and they may preach
Who please,—the more because they preach without success (or without purpose),—
Let us have wine and women, happiness and laughter,
Religious speeches and soda-water the day after.

Man, being reasonable, must get drunk;
The best of life is only drunkenness:
Glory, the grape, love, gold, in these are sunk
The hopes of all men, and of every nation;
Without their sap, how branchless were the trunk
Of life's strange tree, so productive on occasion:
But to return,—Get very drunk; and when
You wake with headache, you will see what then.

Ring for your valet—bid him quickly bring
Some hock and soda-water, then you 'll know
A pleasure worthy Xerxes the great king;
For not the blessed sherbet, amazingd with snow,
Nor the first sparkle of the desert-spring,
Nor (dark red color/dark red wine) in all its sunset glow,
After long travel, boredom, love, or murder,
Fight with that glass of/draft of hock and soda-water.

The coast—I think it was the coast that
Was just describing—Yes, it was the coast—
Lay at this period quiet as the sky,
The sands untumbled, the blue waves untost,
And all was stillness, save the sea-bird's cry,
And dolphin's leap, and little wave in the wind crost
By some low rock or (cancel/delay), that made it fret
Against the edge/border it hardly wet.

And forward they wander'd, her sire being gone,
As I have said, upon a big, important trip;
And mother, brother, (person who protects another from harm), she had none,
Save Zoe, who, although with due (high) quality
She waited on her lady with the sun,
Thought daily service was her only mission,
Bringing warm water, wreathing her long hair,
And asking now and then for cast-off dresses.

It was the cooling hour, just when the rounded
Red sun sinks down behind the blue hill,
Which then seems as if the whole earth it bounded,
Circling all nature, quieted, and dim, and still,
With the far mountain-crescent half surrounded
On one side, and the deep sea calm and chill
Upon the other, and the wonderful sky,
With one star sparkling through it like an eye.

And so they wander'd forward, and hand in hand,
Over the shining pebbles and the shells,
Glided along the smooth and harden'd sand,
And in the worn and wild receptacles
Work'd by the storms, yet work'd as it were plann'd,
In hollow halls, with sparry roofs and cells,
They turned to rest; and, each held by an arm,
Cooperated with/produced/gave up to the deep (the soft light just before sunrise or after sunset)'s purple charm.

They looked up to the sky, whose floating glow
Spread like a wonderful ocean, huge and bright;
They looked at the shining and twinkling (like jewelry) sea below,
From where the broad moon rose circling into sight;
They heard the wave's splash, and the wind so low,
And saw each other's dark eyes quickly moving light
Into each other—and, (looking/seeing) this,
Their lips drew near, and clung into a kiss;

A long, long kiss, a kiss of youth, and love,
And beauty, all (focusing one's effort/increasing/mainly studying) like rays
Into one focus, set on fire/started from above;
Such kisses as belong to early days,
Where heart, and soul, and sense, in concert move,
And the blood 's lava, and the pulse a blaze,
Each kiss a heart-shake/earthquake,—for a kiss's strength,
I think, it must be figure out/think'd by its length.

By length I mean length of time; theirs lasted through/tolerated
Heaven knows how long—no doubt they never figure out/think'd;
And if they had, they could not have secured
The sum of their feelings to a second:
They had not spoken; but they felt attracted,
As if their souls and lips each other invite'd,
Which, being joined, like crowding/moving in huge numbers bees they clung—
Their hearts the flowers from where the honey sprung.

They were alone, but not alone as they
Who shut in rooms think it loneliness;
The silent ocean, and the starlight bay,
The (the soft light just before sunrise or after sunset) glow which momently grew less,
The voiceless sands and dropping caves, that lay
Around them, made them to each other press,
As if there were no life beneath the sky
Save theirs, and that their life could never die.

They feared no eyes nor ears on that (single/alone) beach,
They felt no terrors from the night, they were
All in all to each other: though their speech
Was broken words, they thought a language there,—
And all the burning tongues the strong emotions teach
Found in one sigh the best understand/explainer
Of nature's magician—first love,—that all
Which Eve has left her daughters since her fall.

Haidde did not speak of sense of right and wrong, asked no serious promises,
Nor offered any; she had never heard
Of trouble(s) and promises to be a (husband or wife),
Or dangers by a loving maid (brought on to herself or himself);
She was all which total/totally/with nothing else mixed in (the state of having no knowledge) allows,
And flew to her young mate like a young bird;
And, never having dreamed of lie/dishonesty, she
Had not one word to say of faithfulness.

She loved, and was loved—she deeply loved,
And she was worshipped; after nature's fashion,
Their intense souls, into each other poured,
If souls could die, had die/go bad'd in that passion,—
But by degrees their senses were restored,
Again to be overcome, again to dash on;
And, beating against his chest, Haidee's heart
Felt as if never more to beat apart.

(what a shame)! they were so young, so beautiful,
So lonely, loving, helpless, and the hour
Was that in which the heart is always full,
And, having over itself no further power,
Prompts deeds (time going on forever) can not make legally invalid,
But pays off moments in an endless shower
Of hell-fire—all prepared for people giving
Pleasure or pain to one another living.

(what a shame)! for Juan and Haidee! they were
So loving and so lovely—till then never,
Excepting our first parents, such a pair
Had risk being damned for ever;
And Haidee, being very loyal as well as fair,
Had, definitely, heard about the (like a river in Hell) river,
And hell and hell-like place—but forgot
Just in the very serious problem she should not.

They look upon each other, and their eyes
Shine in the moonlight; and her white arm clasps
Round Juan's head, and his around her lies
Half buried in the hair which it grabs/understands;
She sits upon his knee, and drinks his sighs,
He hers, until they end in broken (sudden, short breaths in);
And so they form a group that 's quite old (thing),
Half naked, loving, natural, and Greek.

And when those deep and burning moments passed,
And Juan sunk to sleep within her arms,
She slept not, but all tenderly, though fast,
Sustain'd his head upon her bosom's charms;
And now and then her eye to heaven is cast,
And then on the pale cheek her breast now warms,
Pillow'd on her overflowing heart, which pants
With all it granted, and with all it grants.

An infant when it looks on a light,
A child the moment when it drains the breast,
A fan when flies (beautifully)/increases the Host in sight,
An Arab with a stranger for a guest,
A sailor when the prize has struck in fight,
A cheap person filling his most collected chest,
Feel joy; but not such true joy are collecting
As they who watch over what they love while sleeping.

For there it lies so peaceful, so loved,
All that it has of life with us is living;
So gentle, stirless, helpless, and unmoved,
And all unconscious of the joy it is giving;
All it has felt, caused, passed, and proved,
Quieted into depths beyond the watcher's diving:
There lies the thing we love with all its errors
And all its charms, like death without its terrors.

The lady watched her lover—and that hour
Of Love's, and Night's, and Ocean's quiet aloneness,
Overflow'd her soul with their united power;
In the middle of the (nothing good exists) sand and rocks so rude
She and her wave-worn love had made their house-building,
Where nothing upon their passion could intrude,
And all the stars that crowded the blue space
Saw nothing happier than her glowing face.

(what a shame)! the love of women! it is known
To be a lovely and an afraid/scary thing;
For all of theirs upon that die is thrown,
And if it is lost, life has no more to bring
To them but jokes of the past alone,
And their revenge is as the tiger's spring,
Deadly, and quick, and crushing; yet, as real
Torture is theirs, what they cause they feel.

They are right; for man, to man so often unfair,
Is always so to women; one only bond
Waits for them, sneaky, criminal behavior is all their trust;
Taught to hide, their bursting hearts become sad and discouraged
Over their idol, till some richer lust
Buys them in marriage—and what rests beyond?
A thankless husband, next a faithless lover,
Then dressing, nursing, praying, and all 's over.

Some take a lover, some take drams or prayers,
Some mind their household, others disappearing (or wasting),
Some run away, and but exchange their cares,
Losing the advantage of a honest and good station;
Few changes ever can better their affairs,
Theirs being an unnatural situation,
From the dull palace to the dirty dirty house:
Some play the devil, and then write a novel.

Haidee was Nature's bride, and did not know this;
Haidee was Passion's child, born where the sun
Showers triple light, and burns even the kiss
Of his looklle-eyed daughters; she was one
Made but to love, to feel that she was his
Who was her chosen: what was said or done
In other places was nothing. She had nothing to fear,
Hope, care, nor love, beyond, her heart beat here.

And oh! that quickening of the heart, that beat!
How much it costs us! yet each rising throb
Is in its cause as its effect so sweet,
That Wisdom, ever on the watch to rob
Joy of its alchymy, and to repeat
Fine truths; even Sense of right and wrong, too, has a tough job
To make us understand each good old true statement,
So good—I wonder Castlereagh don't tax them.

And now 't was done—on the (single/alone) shore were promised
Their hearts; the stars, their marriage-related torches, shed
Beauty upon the beautiful they lighted:
Ocean their witness, and the cave their bed,
By their own feelings holy and united,
Their priest was Quiet aloneness, and they were wed:
And they were happy, for to their young eyes
Each was an angel, and earth paradise.

O, Love! of whom great Caesar was the romantic interest,
Titus the master, Antony the slave,
Horace, Catullus, educated people, Ovid tutor,
Sappho the smart blue-stocking, in whose grave
All those may leap who rather would be neuter
(Leucadia's rock still (ignores/doesn't notice) the wave)—
O, Love! you are the very god of evil,
For, after all, we cannot call you devil.

You mak'st the (not involved with sex or sex-related things) marriage-related state dangerously unsteady,
And jokeest with the brows of strongest men:
Caesar and Pompey, Mahomet, Belisarius,
Have much employ'd the art goddess of history's pen;
Their lives and fortunes were very different,
Such worthies Time will never see again;
Yet to these four in three things the same luck holds,
They all were heroes, powerful rulers, and (husbands of unfaithful wives).

You mak'st (people who think a lot about how people think); there 's Epicurus
And Aristippus, a material crew!
Who to socially wrong courses would attraction us
By explanations (of why things work or happen the way they do) quite doable too;
If only from the devil they would insure us,
How pleasant were the true statement (not quite new),
'Eat, drink, and love, what can the rest use/advantage us?'
So said the royal smart Sardanapalus.

But Juan! had he quite forgotten Julia?
And should he have forgotten her so soon?
I can't but say it seems to me most truly
Confusing question; but, no doubt, the moon
Does these things for us, and whenever newly
Strong unsteady heartbeat rises, it is her advantage,
Else how the devil is it that fresh features
Have such a charm for us poor human creatures?

I hate unsteady, unreliable nature—I hate, hate,
Hate, strongly criticize, reject the mortal made
Of such mercury clay that in his breast
No permanent foundation can be laid;
Love, constant love, has been my constant guest,
And yet last night, being at a pretend/mask-wearing party,
I saw the prettiest creature, fresh from Milan,
Which gave me some feelings like an evil person.

But soon (way of thinking/related to learning about how people think) came to my aid,
And whisper'd, 'Think of every holy and untouchable tie!'
'I will, my dear (way of thinking/related to learning about how people think)!' I said,
'But then her teeth, and then, oh, Heaven! her eye!
I'll just ask if she be wife or maid,
Or neither—out of curiosity.'
'Stop!' cried (way of thinking/related to learning about how people think), with air so Grecian
(Though she was masqued then as a fair Venetian);

'Stop!' so I stopped.—But to return: that which
Men call unsteady, unreliable nature is nothing more
Than strong feeling of pleasure and wonder due where nature's rich
Large amount with young beauty covers over
Some favour'd object; and as in the niche
A lovely statue we almost deeply love,
This sort of deep love of the real
Is only an increasing of the 'beau ideal.'

It is the perception of the beautiful,
A fine extension of the faculties,
(strictly friendly; no sex), universal, wonderful,
Drawn from the stars, and filter'd through the skies,
Without which life would be very dull;
In short, it is the use of our own eyes,
With one or two small senses added, just
To hint that flesh is form'd of fiery dust.

Yet it is a painful feeling, and unwilling,
For surely if we always could perceive
In the same object graces quite as killing
As when she rose upon us like an Eve,
'T would save us many an emotional pain, many a shilling
(For we must get them any how or grieve),
Whereas if one only lady pleased for ever,
How pleasant for the heart as well as liver!

The heart is like the sky, a part of heaven,
But changes night and day, too, like the sky;
Now over it clouds and thunder must be driven,
And darkness and destruction as on high:
But when it has been burn'd, and pierced, and ripped apart,
Its storms expire in water-drops; the eye
Pours forward at last the heart's blood turned to tears,
Which make the English climate of our years.

The liver is the lazaret of (anger/irritability)/(bitter digestive liquid),
But very rarely executes its function,
For the first passion stays there such a while,
That all the rest creep in and form a (connecting point/joining point),
Life knots of vipers on a (hill of poop)'s soil,—
Extreme anger, fear, hate, jealousy, revenge, feeling of guilt,—
So that all mischiefs spring up from this entrail,
Like earthquakes from the hidden fire called 'central,'

In the mean time, without going ahead/moving forward more
In this (body structure), I 've finish'd now
Two hundred and odd groups of lines in a poem as before,
That being about the number I 'll allow
Each (part of a poem) of the twelve, or twenty-four;
And, laying down my pen, I make my bow,
Leaving Don Juan and Haidee to plead
For them and theirs with all who choose to read.