I want a hero: an unusual/amazing want,
When every year and month sends forward a new one,
Till, after (way too sweet or pleasant) the newspapers with tilt/language,
The age discovers he is not the true one;
Of such as these I should not care to vaunt,
I 'll therefore take our very old friend Don Juan—
We all have seen him, in the act things out (without using words),
Sent to the devil somewhat before his time.

Vernon, the butcher Cumberland, Wolfe, Hawke,
Prince Ferdinand, Granby, Burgoyne, Keppel, Howe,
Evil and good, have had their give one-tenth/one-tenth of talk,
And filled their sign posts then, like Wellesley now;
Each in their turn like Banquo's kings and queens stalk,
Followers of fame, 'nine farrow' of that female pig:
France, too, had Buonaparte and Dumourier
Recorded in the Moniteur and (person or business that carries messages).

Barnave, Brissot, Condorcet, Mirabeau,
Petion, Clootz, Danton, Marat, La Fayette,
Were French, and famous people, as we know:
And there were others, rare/not enough forgotten yet,
Joubert, Hoche, Marceau, Lannes, Desaix, Moreau,
With many of the military set,
Very amazing and interesting at times,
But not at all changed to fit my rhymes.

Nelson was once Britannia's god of war,
And still should be so, but the tide is turned;
There 's no more to be said of Trafalgar,
It is with our hero quietly placed into an urn;
Because the army 's grown more popular,
At which the naval people are concern'd;
Besides, the prince is all for the land-service,
Forgetting Duncan, Nelson, Howe, and Jervis.

Brave men were living before Agamemnon
And since, going beyond brave and smart,
A good deal like him too, though quite the same none;
But then they shone not on the poet's page,
And so have been forgotten:—I strongly criticize none,
But can't find any in the present age
Fit for my poem (that is, for my new one);
So, as I said, I 'll take my friend Don Juan.

Most huge/famous poets plunge 'in medias res'
(Horace makes this the heroic toll highway road),
And then your hero tells, whene'er you please,
What went before—by way of episode,
While seated after dinner at his ease,
Beside his mistress in some soft home,
Palace, or garden, paradise, or cave,
Which serves the happy couple for a tavern.

That is the usual method, but not mine—
My way is to begin with the beginning;
The (happening over and over again in a predictable way) of my design
Forbids all wandering as the worst of sinning,
And therefore I will open with a line
(Although it cost me half an hour in spinning)
Narrating somewhat of Don Juan's father,
And also of his mother, if you 'd rather.

In Seville was he born, a pleasant city,
Famous for oranges and women—he
Who has not seen it will be much to pity,
So says the proverb—and I quite agree;
Of all the Spanish towns is none more pretty,
Cadiz maybe—but that you soon may see;
Don Juan's parents lived beside the river,
A noble stream, and called the Guadalquivir.

His father's name was Jose—Don, of course,—
A true Hidalgo, free from every stain
Of Moor or Hebrew blood, he traced his source
Through the most Gothic gentlemen of Spain;
A better uncaring (about something important) never mounted horse,
Or, being mounted, ever got down again,
Than Jose, who created our hero, who
Created—but that 's to come—Well, to renew:

His mother was a learned lady, famous
For every branch of every science known
In every Christian language ever named,
With good qualities/advantages equall'd by her clever humor alone,
She made the cleverest people quite ashamed,
And even the good with inward jealousy (deep, long sound of suffering),
Finding themselves so very much went beyond
In their own way by all the things that she did.

Her memory was a mine: she knew (memorized)
All Calderon and greater part of Run,
So that if any actor miss'd his part
She could have served him for the prompter's copy;
For her Feinagle's were an useless art,
And he himself obliged to shut up shop—he
Could never make a memory so fine as
That which decorate'd the brain of Donna Inez.

Her favourite science was the mathematical,
Her highest-quality good thing/excellence/advantage was her generosity,
Her clever humor (she sometimes tried at wit) was Attic all,
Her serious sayings darken'd to greatness;
In short, in all things she was fairly what I call
A genius—her morning dress was dimity,
Her evening silk, or, in the summer, fabric,
And other stuffs, with which I won't stay confusing.

She knew the Latin—that is, 'the Lord's prayer,'
And Greek—the alphabet—I 'm nearly sure;
She read some French romances here and there,
Although her mode of speaking was not total/totally/with nothing else mixed in;
For native Spanish she had no great care,
At least her conversation was unknown;
Her thoughts were true ideas, her words a problem,
As if she thought of/considered that mystery would (make into a king or queen) them.

She liked the English and the Hebrew tongue,
And said there was comparison between them;
She proved it somehow out of holy and untouchable song,
But I must leave the proofs to those who 've seen them;
But this I heard her say, and can't be wrong
And all may think which way their judgments lean them,
''T is strange—the Hebrew noun which means "I am,"
The English always use to govern d--n.'

Some women use their tongues—she looked a lecture,
Each eye a religious speech, and her brow a talk/lecture,
An all-in-all (good) enough self-director,
Like the (sadly complained about) late Sir Samuel Romilly,
The Law's explainer, and the State's corrector,
Whose suicide was almost a (weird, unexpected thing)—
One sad example more, that 'All is self-love'
(The jury brought their legal decision in 'Insanity').

In short, she was a walking calculation,
Miss Edgeworth's novels stepping from their covers,
Or Mrs. Trimmer's books on education,
Or 'Coelebs' Wife' set out in search of lovers,
Sense of right and wrong's formally proper (giving a non-living thing qualities of a living thing/existence of a perfect living representation of something),
In which not Jealousy's self a flaw discovers;
To others' share let 'female errors fall,'
For she had not even one—the worst of all.

O! she was perfect past all parallel—
Of any modern female saint's comparison;
So far above the clever powers of hell,
Her guardian angel had given up his fort;
Even her tiniest movements went as well
As those of the best time-piece made by Harrison:
In good qualities/advantages nothing earthly could go past her,
Save your/yours 'incomparable oil,' Macassar!

Perfect she was, but as perfection is
Boring in this naughty world of ours,
Where our first parents never learned to kiss
Till they were (permanently removed from a country) from their earlier leafy houses,
Where all was peace, and innocence, and bliss
(I wonder how they got through the twelve hours),
Don Jose, like a lineal son of Eve,
Went pulling different fruit without her leave.

He was a mortal of the careless kind,
With no great love for learning, or the learned,
Who chose to go where'er he had a mind,
And never dreamed his lady was concern'd;
The world, as usual, (in an evil way) inclined
To see a kingdom or a house overturn'd,
Whisper'd he had a mistress, some said two—
But for domestic arguments one will do.

Now Donna Inez had, with all her merit,
A great opinion of her own good qualities;
Neglect, in fact, needs/demands a saint to bear it,
And such, in fact, she was in her moralities;
But then she had a devil of a spirit,
And sometimes mixed up ideas with realities,
And let few opportunities escape
Of getting her lord lord into a fight.

This was an easy matter with a man
Often in the wrong, and never on his guard;
And even the wisest, do the best they can,
Have moments, hours, and days, so (not ready for something),
That you might 'brain them with their lady's fan;'
And sometimes ladies hit going beyond hard,
And fans turn into falchions in fair hands,
And reason no one understands.

It is pity learned virgins ever wed
With people of no sort of education,
Or gentlemen, who, though well born and raised/trained,
Grow tired of scientific conversation:
I don't choose to say much upon this head,
I 'm a plain man, and in a single station,
But—Oh! you lords of ladies thinking-related,
Inform us truly, have they not hen-peck'd you all?

Don Jose and his lady quarrell'd—why,
Not any of the many could discover,
Though (more than two thousand) people chose to try,
It was surely no concern of theirs nor mine;
I hate that low vice—curiosity;
But if there 's anything in which I shine,
It is in arranging all my friends' affairs,
Not having of my own domestic cares.

And so I interfered, and with the best
Plans/desires, but their treatment was not kind;
I think the foolish people were possessed,
For neither of them could I ever find,
Although their porter later/after that confess'd—
But that 's no matter, and the worst 's behind,
For little Juan over me threw, down stairs,
A pail of housemaid's water unaware of what's going on.

A little curly-headed, good-for-nothing,
And mischief-making monkey from his birth;
His parents never agreed except in loving
Upon the most loud little devil/troublemaking child on earth;
Instead of arguing, had they been but both in
Their senses, they 'd have sent young master forth
To school, or had him soundly whipped at home,
To teach him manners for the time to come.

Don Jose and the Donna Inez led
For some time an unhappy sort of life,
Wishing each other, not divorced, but dead;
They lived respectably as man and wife,
Their behavior was very (raised to be polite and interesting),
And gave no outward signs of inward battle(s)/tension,
Until at length the smother'd fire broke out,
And put the business past all kind of doubt.

For Inez called some druggists and doctors,
And tried to prove her loving lord was mad;
But as he had some clear (short breaks in the middle of shows),
She next decided he was only bad;
Yet when they asked her for her legal statements under oath,
No sort of explanation could be had,
Save that her duty both to man and God
Needed/demanded this conduct—which seemed very odd.

She kept a journal, where his faults were noted,
And opened certain trunks of books and letters,
All which might, if occasion served, be quoted;
And then she had all Seville for helpers/encouragers,
Besides her good old grandmother (who (show love and attention)d);
The hearers of her case became repeaters,
Then fights (for something), investigators, and judges,
Some for mild happiness/interesting thing, others for old angry feelings.

And then this best and weakest woman bore
With such calmness her husband's troubles,
Just as the Very plain and simple ladies did of a long time ago,
Who saw their (husband or wife)s killed, and honorably chose
Never to say a word about them more—
(in a relaxed, controlled way) she heard each insulting talk that rose,
And saw his extremely bad pains with such greatness,
That all the world shouted, 'What generosity!'

No doubt this patience, when the world is damning us,
Is philosophic in our former friends;
It is also pleasant to be thought of/considered generous,
The more so in getting our own ends;
And what the lawyers call a 'malus hatred'
Conduct like this by no means understands;
Revenge in person 's certainly no good thing/excellence/advantage,
But then it is not my fault, if others hurt you.

And if your arguments should rip up old stories,
And help them with a lie or two added/more,
I 'm not to blame, as you well know—no more is
Any one else—they were become traditional;
Besides, their returning from the dead aids our glories
Very differently, which is what we just were wishing all:
And science makes money by this returning from the dead—
Dead (shameful or disgraceful acts or situations) form good subjects for cutting apart.

Their friends had tried at making up (from an argument),
Then their relations, who made things worse.
('T were hard to tell upon a like occasion
To whom it may be best to have access to help—
I can't say much for friend or yet relation):
The lawyers did their extreme for divorce,
But hardly a fee was paid on either side
Before, unluckily, Don Jose died.

He died: and most unluckily, because,
According to all hints I could collect
From advice learned in those kinds of laws
(Although their talk 's unknown and careful),
His death planned to spoil a charming cause;
A thousand feels very sorry for also with respect
To public feeling, which on this occasion
Was shown/was obvioused in a great feeling/excited feeling.

But, ah! he died; and buried with him lay
The public feeling and the lawyers' fees:
His house was sold, his servants sent away,
A Jew took one of his two mistresses,
A priest the other—at least so they say:
I asked the doctors after his disease—
He died of the slow fever called the tertian,
And left his widow to her own disgust and hatred.

Yet Jose was a honorable man,
That I must say who knew him very well;
Therefore his weaknesses I 'll no further scan
In fact there were not many more to tell;
And if his strong emotions now and then outran
(ability to make wise decisions), and were not so peaceable
As Numa's (who was also named Pompilius),
He had been ill brought up, and was born nauseated/angry/ugly.

Whatever might be his worthlessness or worth,
Poor fellow! he had many things to wound him.
Let 's own—since it can do no good on earth—
It was a trying moment that which found him
Standing alone beside his lonely and empty fireplace,
Where all his household gods lay shake (from fear or cold)'d round him:
No choice was left his feelings or his pride,
Save death or Doctors' Commons—so he died.

Dying (without a will after death), Juan was only heir
To a chancery suit, and messuages, and lands,
Which, with a long minority and care,
Promised to turn out well in proper hands:
Inez became only (person who protects another from harm), which was fair,
And answered but to nature's just demands;
An only son left with an only mother
Is brought up much more intelligently than another.

Smart peoplet of women, even of widows, she
Resolved that Juan should be quite a perfect model,
And worthy of the highest-quality (proof of coming from an excellent family)
(His sire was of Castile, his dam from Aragon):
Then for (things that were completed) of kindness to women,
In case our lord the king should go to war again,
He learned the arts of riding, fencing, gunnery,
And how to scale a (large, very secure place)—or a nunnery.

But that which Donna Inez most desired,
And saw into herself each day before all
The learned teachers whom for him she hired,
Was, that his breeding should be strictly moral;
Much into all his studies she asked,
And so they were submitted first to her, all,
Arts, sciences, no branch was made a mystery
To Juan's eyes, excepting natural history.

The languages, especially the dead,
The sciences, and most of all the difficult and confusing,
The arts, at least all such as could be said
To be the most remote from common use,
In all these he was much and deeply read;
But not a page of any thing that 's loose,
Or hints continuation of the species,
Was ever suffer'd, (because of fear that the following will happen:) he should grow evil and violent.

His classic studies made a little puzzle,
Because of very dirty loves of gods and goddesses,
Who in the earlier ages raised a bustle,
But never put on (loose pants that end at the knee) or (part of a dress above the waist)s;
His reverend teachers had at times a fight,
And for their AEneids, Iliads, and Adventure/tripss,
Were forced to make an odd sort! of apology,
For Donna Inez feared and hated the Very old stories.

Ovid 's a rake, as half his verses show him,
Anacreon's morals are a still worse sample,
Catullus hardly has a decent poem,
I don't think Sappho's Emotional poem a good example,
Although Longinus tells us there is no religious song
Where the amazing flies (beautifully)/increases forward on wings more big/enough:
But Virgil's songs are total/totally/with nothing else mixed in, except that terrible, scary one
Beginning with 'Formosum Pastor Corydon.'

Lucretius' irreligion is too strong,
For early stomachs, to prove healthy/good food;
I can't help thinking Young person was wrong,
Although no doubt his real intent was good,
For speaking out so plainly in his song,
So much in fact as to be complete(ly) rude;
And then what proper person can be partial
To all those nauseous clever sayings of Martial?

Juan was taught from out the best edition,
(removed offensive material) by learned men, who place
Wisely, from out the schoolboy's vision,
The grosser parts; but, afraid/scary to (damage the looks of)
Too much their modest poet by this mistake (where something was left out),
And kind/feeling sorry for sore his badly hurt case,
They only add them all in an add on,
Which saves, in fact, the trouble of an index;

For there we have them all 'at one fell swoop,'
Instead of being scatter'd through the Pages;
They stand forward gather togetherl'd in an attractive troop,
To meet the honest and innocent youth of future ages,
Till some less stiff/not flexible editor will stoop
To call them back into their separate cages,
Instead of standing staring all together,
Like garden gods—and not so decent either.

The Missal too (it was the family Missal)
Was decorated in a sort of way
Which very old mass-books often are, and this all
Kinds of weird, ugly things lit up; and how they,
Who saw those figures on the margin kiss all,
Could turn their optics to the text and pray,
Is more than I know—But Don Juan's mother
Kept this herself, and gave her son another.

Religious speeches he read, and lectures he lasted through/tolerated,
And talks/lectures, and lives of all the saints;
To Jerome and to Chrysostom (got used to something bad),
He did not take such studies for (handcuffs, etc./things that slow down or hold back something);
But how faith is gotten over time/purchased, and then secured/made sure of,
So well not one of the (earlier-said) paints
As Saint Augustine in his fine Confessions,
Which make the reader jealousy his crimes.

This, too, was a sealed book to little Juan—
I can't but say that his mamma was right,
If such an education was the true one.
She hardly trusted him from out her sight;
Her young women/cleaning women were old, and if she took a new one,
You might be sure she was a perfect fright;
She did this during even her husband's life—
I recommend as much to every wife.

Young Juan wax'd in goodliness and grace;
At six a charming child, and at eleven
With all the promise of as fine a face
As ever to man's maturer growth was given:
He studied steadily, and grew apace,
And seemed, at least, in the right road to heaven,
For half his days were passed at church, the other
Between his teachers, (priest who listens to people admitting bad things), and mother.

At six, I said, he was a charming child,
At twelve he was a fine, but quiet boy;
Although in (very beginning stages) a little wild,
They (brought under control) him down among them: to destroy
His natural spirit not without success (or without purpose) they toil'd,
At least it seemed so; and his mother's joy
Was to declare how smart, and still, and steady,
Her young (someone who thinks a lot about how people think) was grown already.

I had my doubts, maybe I have them still,
But what I say is neither here nor there:
I knew his father well, and have some skill
In character—but it would not be fair
From sire to son to predict good or ill:
He and his wife were a (bad or poorly)-sorted pair—
But (shameful and disgraceful act or situation) 's my disgust and hatred—I protest
Against all evil speaking, even as a joke.

For my part I say nothing—nothing—but
This I will say—my reasons are my own—
That if I had an only son to put
To school (as God be praised that I have none),
It is not with Donna Inez I would shut
Him up to learn his church teachings alone,
No—no—I 'd send him out betimes to college,
For there it was I pick'd up my own knowledge.

For there one learns—'t is not for me to brag,
Though I buy/own/received—but I pass over that,
As well as all the Greek I since have lost:
I say that there 's the place—but 'Verbum sat.'
I think I pick'd up too, as well as most,
Knowledge of matters—but no matter what—
I never married—but, I think, I know
That sons should not be educated so.

Young Juan now was sixteen years of age,
Tall, attractive, thin, but well knit: he seemed
Active, though not so energetic, as a page;
And everybody but his mother thought of/considered
Him almost man; but she flew in a rage
And bit her lips (for else she might have scream'd)
If any said so, for to be intelligent (or early-developed)
Was in her eyes a thing the most terrible.

Among her many casual friend/knowledge, all
Selected for (ability to make wise decisions) and loving loyalty,
There was the Donna Julia, whom to call
Pretty were only to give a weak idea/plan
Of many charms in her as natural
As sweetness to the flower, or salt to ocean,
Her zone to Venus, or his bow to Cupid
(But this last simile is boring and stupid).

The darkness of her Oriental eye
Given/gave with her Moorish origin
(Her blood was not all Spanish, by the by;
In Spain, you know, this is a sort of sin);
When proud Granada fell, and, forced to fly,
Boabdil cried, of Donna Julia's kin
Some went to Africa, some stayed in Spain,
Her great-great-grandmamma chose to remain.

She married (I forget the (proof of coming from an excellent family))
With an Hidalgo, who transmitted down
His blood less noble than such blood should be;
At such friendly partnerships his sires would frown,
In that point so exact in each degree
That they raised/trained in and in, as might be shown,
Marrying their cousins—no, their aunts, and nieces,
Which always spoils the breed, if it increases.

This ungodly cross restored the breed again,
Ruined its blood, but much improved its flesh;
For from a root the ugliest in Old Spain
Sprung up a branch as beautiful as fresh;
The sons no more were short, the daughters plain:
But there 's a (story that may or may not be true) which I pleased/with pleasure would hush,
It is said that Donna Julia's grandmamma
Produced her Don more heirs at love than law.

However this might be, the race went on
Improving still through every generation,
Until it centred in an only son,
Who left an only daughter; my narration
May have suggested that this single one
Could be but Julia (whom on this occasion
I will have much to speak about), and she
Was married, charming, (not involved with sex or sex-related things), and twenty-three.

Her eye (I 'm very fond of attractive eyes)
Was large and dark, stopping half its fire
Until she spoke, then through its soft disguise
Flash'd an expression more of pride than ire,
And love than either; and there would arise
A something in them which was not desire,
But would have been, maybe, but for the soul
Which struggled through and punish'd down the whole.

Her glossy hair was grouped over a brow
Bright with intelligence, and fair, and smooth;
Her eyebrow's shape was like the (from high in the air) bow,
Her cheek all purple with the beam of youth,
Mounting at times to a clear/open and honest glow,
As if her veins ran lightning; she, in truth,
Possessed an air and grace by no means common:
Her height tall—I hate a (short and overweight) / (ugly and dirty) woman.

Wedded she was some years, and to a man
Of fifty, and such husbands are in plenty;
And yet, I think, instead of such a ONE
'T were better to have TWO of five-and-twenty,
Especially in countries near the sun:
And now I think on 't, 'mi vien in mente,'
Ladies even of the most uneasy good thing/excellence/advantage
Prefer a (husband or wife) whose age is short of thirty.

It is a sad thing, I cannot choose but say,
And all the fault of that indecent sun,
Who cannot leave alone our helpless clay,
But will keep baking, (cooking under fire/extremely hot), burning on,
That however people fast and pray,
The flesh is weak, and so the soul undone:
What men call courage, and gods (cheating on your spouse),
Is much more common where the climate 's warm.

Happy the nations of the moral North!
Where all is good thing/excellence/advantage, and the winter season
Sends sin, without a rag on, shaking (from fear or cold) forth
('T was snow that brought St. Anthony to reason);
Where juries cast up what a wife is worth,
By laying whatever sum in theft/fine they please on
The lover, who must pay an attractive price,
Because it is a marketable crime/harmful behavior.

Alfonso was the name of Julia's lord,
A man well looking for his years, and who
Was neither much loved nor yet hater'd:
They lived together, as most people do,
Suffering each other's weaknesses by agreement,
And not exactly either one or two;
Yet he was jealous, though he did not show it,
For jealousy dislikes the world to know it.

Julia was—yet I never could see why—
With Donna Inez quite a favourite friend;
Between their tastes there was small sympathy,
For not a line had Julia ever penn'd:
Some people whisper but no doubt they lie,
For cruelty and evilness still credits some private end,
That Inez had, before Don Alfonso's marriage,
Forgot with him her very cautious and wise (vehicle with wheels/body posture/carrying something);

And that still keeping up the old connection,
Which time had lately made/given much more (not involved with sex or sex-related things),
She took his lady also in feeling of love,
And certainly this course was much the best:
She flatter'd Julia with her smart protection,
And complimented Don Alfonso's taste;
And if she could not (who can?) silence (shameful and disgraceful act or situation),
At least she left it a more thin handle.

I can't tell whether Julia saw the affair
With other people's eyes, or if her own
Discoveries made, but none could be aware
Of this, at least no sign of sickness ever was shown;
Maybe she did not know, or did not care,
(not caring one way or the other) from the first or (not caring about the problems of others) grown:
I 'm really confused what to think or say,
She kept her advice in so close a way.

Juan she saw, and, as a pretty child,
Sweet, gentle touch/touch sweetly and gently'd him often—such a thing might be
Quite innocently done, and harmless styled,
When she had twenty years, and thirteen he;
But I am not so sure I should have smiled
When he was sixteen, Julia twenty-three;
These few short years make amazing changes,
Especially among sun-burnt nations.

Whatever the cause might be, they had become
Changed; for the dame grew distant, the youth shy,
Their looks cast down, their greetings almost dumb,
And much embarrassment in either eye;
There surely will be little doubt with some
That Donna Julia knew the reason why,
But as for Juan, he had no more idea/plan
Than he who never saw the sea of ocean.

Yet Julia's very coldness still was kind,
And unsteadily gentle her small hand
Withdrew itself from his, but left behind
A little pressure, thrilling, and so dull
And small/short, so very small, that to the mind
It was but a doubt; but never magician's wand
Created/formed change with all Armida's fairy art
Like what this light touch left on Juan's heart.

And if she met him, though she smiled no more,
She looked a sadness sweeter than her smile,
As if her heart had deeper thoughts in store
She must not own, but love and honor'd more the while
For that (press or force into a smaller space)ion in its burning core;
Even innocence itself has many a cleverness,
And will not dare to trust itself with truth,
And love is taught (when a person doesn't do what he or she orders everyone else to do) from youth.

But passion most hide the truths, yet betrays
Even by its darkness; as the blackest sky
Predicts the heaviest storm, it displays
Its workings through the selfishly/unsuccessfully guarded eye,
And in whatever aspect it arrays
Itself, it is still the same (when a person doesn't do what he or she orders everyone else to do);
Coldness or anger, even strong dislike or hate,
Are masks it often wears, and still too late.

Then there were sighs, the deeper for stopping/preventing (actions or feelings),
And stolen looks, sweeter for the theft,
And burning reddish colors (in the cheeks), though for no crime,
Fearful shaking when met, and not being able to keep the body still when left;
All these are little (things that happen before other things) to possession,
Of which young passion cannot be left without,
And only tend to show how greatly love is
Embarrass'd at first starting with a beginner.

Poor Julia's heart was in an awkward state;
She felt it going, and promised to make
The highest-quality efforts for herself and mate,
For honor's, pride's, religion's, good thing/excellence/advantage's sake;
Her resolutions were most truly great,
And almost might have made a Tarquin shake/earthquake:
She prayed the Virgin Mary for her grace,
As being the best judge of a lady's case.

She vow'd she never would see Juan more,
And next day paid a visit to his mother,
And looked very at the opening door,
Which, by the Virgin's grace, let in another;
Thankful she was, and yet a little sore—
Again it opens, it can be no other,
It is surely Juan now—No! I 'm afraid
That night the Virgin was no further prayed.

She now decided/figured out that a honest and good woman
Should rather face and overcome (something that makes you want to do something/the feeling of wanting to do something),
That flight was base and cruel, and no man
Should ever give her heart the least feeling/excited feeling;
That is to say, a thought beyond the common
Preference, that we must feel upon occasion
For people who are pleasanter than others,
But then they only seem so many brothers.

And even if by chance—and who can tell?
The devil 's so very sly—she should discover
That all within was not so very well,
And, if still free, that such or such a lover
Might please maybe, a honest and good wife can stop/quiet
Such thoughts, and be the better when they 're over;
And if the man should ask, it is but denial:
I recommend young ladies to make trial.

And then there are such things as love wonderful/God-related,
Bright and extremely clean, ummixed and total/totally/with nothing else mixed in,
Such as the angels think so very fine,
And married women who would be no less secure,
(strictly friendly; no sex), perfect, 'just such love as mine;'
This way Julia said—and thought so, to be sure;
And so I 'd have her think, were I the man
On whom her deep thoughts heavenly ran.

Such love is innocent, and may exist
Between young people without any danger.
A hand may first, and then a lip be kist;
For my part, to such actions I 'm a stranger,
But hear these freedoms form extreme list
Of all over which such love may be a ranger:
If people go beyond, it is quite a crime,
But not my fault—I tell them all in time.

Love, then, but love within its proper limits,
Was Julia's innocent strong desire/formal decision about something
In young Don Juan's favour, and to him its
Hard work might be useful on occasion;
And, lighted at too total/totally/with nothing else mixed in a shrine to dim its
Light and airy shine, with what sweet persuasion
He might be taught, by love and her together—
I really don't know what, nor Julia either.

Filled with/full of this fine plan/purpose, and well fenced
In mail of proof—her purity of soul—
She, for the future of her strength convinced.
And that her honor was a rock, or mole,
Going beyond smartly from that hour dispensed
With any kind of troublesome control;
But whether Julia to the job was equal
Is that which must be talk about/say'd in the story (after this one).

Her plan she thought of/considered both innocent and (able to be done),
And, surely, with a young person of sixteen
Not (shameful and disgraceful act or situation)'s fangs could fix on much that 's seizable,
Or if they did so, made happy (by meeting a need or reaching a goal) to mean
Nothing but what was good, her breast was peaceable—
A quiet sense of right and wrong makes one so calm!
Christians have burnt each other, quite convinced
That all the Apostles would have done as they did.

And if in the mean time her husband died,
But Heaven forbid that such a thought should cross
Her brain, though in a dream! (and then she sigh'd)
Never could she survive that common loss;
But just suppose that moment should happen to,
I only say suppose it—bury nos.
(This should be (between us, confidentially), for Julia thought
In French, but then the rhyme would go for nothing.)

I only say suppose this assumption:
Juan being then grown up to man's estate
Would fully suit a widow of condition,
Even seven years from now it would not be too late;
And in the meantime (to chase after this vision)
The mischief, after all, could not be great,
For he would learn the basics/beginnings of love,
I mean the angel way of those above.

So much for Julia. Now we 'll turn to Juan.
Poor little fellow! he had no idea
Of his own case, and never hit the true one;
In feelings quick as Ovid's Miss Medea,
He thought carefully about what he found a new one,
But not up until now imagined it could be
Thing quite in course, and not at all upsetting,
Which, with a little patience, might grow charming.

Silent and thoughtful, idle, restless, slow,
His home (having no people) for the lonely wood,
Tortured with a wound he could not know,
His, like all deep sadness (about death), steeply dropped in quiet aloneness:
I 'm fond myself of quiet aloneness or so,
But then, I beg it may be understood,
By quiet aloneness I mean a sultan's, not
A person (who lives alone and avoids others)'s, with a haram for a grot.

'Oh Love! in such a (land area that has never been changed by people) as this,
Where transport and security mix up,
Here is the empire of your perfect extreme happiness,
And here you are a god in fact wonderful/God-related.'
The poet I quote from does not sing wrongly,
With the exception of the second line,
For that same twining 'transport and security'
Are twisted to a phrase of some being unknown.

The poet meant, no doubt, and so appeals
To the good sense and senses of people,
The very thing which every body feels,
As all have found on trial, or may find,
That no one likes to be disturbed at meals
Or love.—I won't say more about 'entwined'
Or 'transport,' as we knew all that before,
But beg 'Security' will bolt the door.

Young Juan wander'd by the glassy brooks,
Thinking terrible things; he threw
Himself at length within the leafy nooks
Where the wild branch of the cork forest grew;
There poets find materials for their books,
And every now and then we read them through,
So that their plan and prosody are (able to be picked/able to participate),
Unless, like Wordsworth, they prove unclear.

He, Juan (and not Wordsworth), so chased after
His self-communion with his own high soul,
Until his mighty heart, in its great mood,
Had lessened (something bad) part, though not the whole
Of its disease; he did the best he could
With things not very subject to control,
And turned, without perceiving his condition,
Like Coleridge, into a metaphysician.

He thought about himself, and the whole earth
Of man the wonderful, and of the stars,
And how the deuce they ever could have birth;
And then he thought of earthquakes, and of wars,
How many miles the moon might have in width,
Of air-balloons, and of the many bars
To perfect knowledge of the endless skies;—
And then he thought of Donna Julia's eyes.

In thoughts like these true wisdom may discern
Wishings amazing, and wishes high,
Which some are born with, but the most part learn
To badly harm and bother themselves with all/also, they know not why:
It was strange that one so young should this way concern
His brain about the action of the sky;
If you think 't was (way of thinking/related to learning about how people think) that this did,
I can't help thinking (the age at which a person can make a baby) helped.

He carefully looked upon the leaves, and on the flowers,
And heard a voice in all the winds; and then
He thought of wood-young women/young insects and incapable of dying leafy houses,
And how the goddesses came down to men:
He miss'd the pathway, he forgot the hours,
And when he looked upon his watch again,
He found how much old Time had been a winner—
He also found that he had lost his dinner.

Sometimes he turned to look at his book,
Boscan, or Garcilasso;—by the wind
Even as the page is rustled while we look,
So by the poetry of his own mind
Over the mystic leaf his soul was shook,
As if it were one on which/on what magicians bind
Their spells, and give them to the passing strong wind,
According to some good old woman's story.

This way would he while his lonely hours away
Dissatisfied, nor knowing what he wanted;
Nor glowing deep thought, nor poet's lay,
Could produce his spirit that for which it panted,
A good/loyal on which/on what he his head might lay,
And hear the heart beat with the love it granted,
With—(more than two, but not a lot of) other things, which I forget,
Or which, at least, I need not talk about yet.

Those lonely walks, and lengthening deep thoughts,
Could not escape the gentle Julia's eyes;
She saw that Juan was not at his ease;
But that which mostly may, and must surprise,
Is, that the Donna Inez did not tease
Her only son with question or guess:
Whether it was she did not see, or would not,
Or, like all very clever people, could not.

This may seem strange, but yet it is very common;
For instance—gentlemen, whose ladies take
Leave to overstep the written rights of woman,
And break the—Which commandment is 't they break?
(I have forgot the number, and think no man
Should ridiculously quote, for fear of a mistake.)
I say, when these same gentlemen are jealous,
They make some mistake, which their ladies tell us.

A real husband always is suspicious,
But still no less suspects in the wrong place,
Jealous of some one who had no such wishes,
Or (giving people what they want, even though it's wrong) (without being able to see) to his own disgrace,
By harbouring some dear friend very evil and violent;
The last in fact 's perfectly the case:
And when the (husband or wife) and friend are gone off completely,
He wonders at their crime/harmful behavior, and not his stupidity.

This way parents also are at times short-sighted;
Though watchful as the lynx, they never discover,
The while the evil world (looks/sees) delighted,
Young Hopeful's mistress, or Miss Fanny's lover,
Till some confused wild, trick-filled adventure has ruined/diseased
The plan of twenty years, and all is over;
And then the mother cries, the father swears,
And wonders why the devil he got heirs.

But Inez was so nervous/eager, and so clear
Of sight, that I must think, on this occasion,
She had some other reason (for doing something) much more near
For leaving Juan to this new (something that makes you want to do something/the feeling of wanting to do something);
But what that reason (for doing something) was, I sha'n't say here;
Maybe to finish Juan's education,
Maybe to open Don Alfonso's eyes,
In case he thought his wife too great a prize.

It was upon a day, a summer's day.—
Summer's in fact a very dangerous season,
And so is spring about the end of May;
The sun, no doubt, is the winning (or most common) reason;
But whatsoe'er the cause is, one may say,
And stand convicted of more truth than treason,
That there are months which nature grows more merry in,—
March has its hares, and May must have its female hero.

It was on a summer's day—the sixth of June:—
I like to be particular in dates,
Not only of the age, and year, but moon;
They are a sort of after-house, where the (unavoidable, already-decided futures)
Change horses, making history change its tune,
Then spur away over empires and over states,
Leaving at last not much besides history-related,
Excepting the after-(descriptions of people who died) of study of God.

It was on the sixth of June, about the hour
Of half-past six—maybe still nearer seven—
When Julia satisfy within as pretty a bower
As ever held houri in that ungodly heaven
Described by Mahomet, and Anacreon Moore,
To whom the lyre and laurels have been given,
With all the trophies of proud (about winning) song—
He won them well, and may he wear them long!

She satisfy, but not alone; I do not know well
How this same interview had happened,
And even if I knew, I should not tell—
People should hold their tongues in any case;
No matter how or why the thing happened to,
But there were she and Juan, face to face—
When two such faces are so, 't would be wise,
But very very hard, to shut their eyes.

How beautiful she looked! her conscious heart
Glow'd in her cheek, and yet she felt no wrong.
O Love! how perfect is your mystic art,
Strengthening the weak, and stepping all over the strong,
How self-dishonest is the smart peoplet part
Of people whom your attractive thing has led along—
The cliff edge she stood on was huge,
So was her religious belief in her own innocence.

She thought of her own strength, and Juan's youth,
And of the stupidity of all strict fears,
Successful (in a battle or contest) good thing/excellence/advantage, and domestic truth,
And then of Don Alfonso's fifty years:
I wish these last had not happenr'd, in truth,
Because that number rarely much (makes someone feel love for),
And through all climates, the snowy and the sunny,
Sounds ill in love, whatever it may in money.

When people say, 'I've told you fifty times,'
They mean to yell at (for bad behavior), and very often do;
When poets say, 'I've written fifty rhymes,'
They make you fear (of a terrible future) that they 'll say them too;
In gangs of fifty, thieves do/perform their crimes;
At fifty love for love is rare, it is true,
But then, no doubt, it equally as true is,
A good deal may be bought for fifty Louis.

Julia had honor, good thing/excellence/advantage, truth, and love,
For Don Alfonso; and she inly swore,
By all the serious promises below to powers above,
She never would disgrace the ring she wore,
Nor leave a wish which wisdom might criticize;
And while she thought carefully about this, besides much more,
One hand on Juan's carelessly was thrown,
Quite by mistake—she thought it was her own;

Unconsciously she lean'd upon the other,
Which played within the tangles of her hair:
And to deal with thoughts she could not smother
She seemed by the (object or action that interferes with mental focus) of her air.
It was surely very wrong in Juan's mother
To leave together this unwise pair,
She who for many years had watched her son so—
I 'm very certain mine would not have done so.

The hand which still held Juan's, by degrees
Gently, but really confirm'd its grab/understand,
As if it said, 'Detain me, if you please;'
Yet there 's no doubt she only meant to clasp
His fingers with a total/totally/with nothing else mixed in (strictly friendly; no sex) squeeze:
She would have shrunk as from a toad, or asp,
Had she imagined such a thing could awaken
A feeling dangerous to a cautious and wise (husband or wife).

I cannot know what Juan thought of this,
But what he did, is much what you would do;
His young lip thank'd it with a thankful kiss,
And then, embarrass'd at its own joy, withdrew
In deep feelings that there is no hope, (because of fear that the following will happen:) he had done wrongly,—
Love is so very shy when it is new:
She blush'd, and frowned not, but she tried to speak,
And held her tongue, her voice was grown so weak.

The sun set, and up rose the yellow moon:
The devil 's in the moon for mischief; they
Who called her CHASTE, I think, began too soon
Their name; there is not a day,
The longest, not the twenty-first of June,
Sees half the business in an evil way
On which three single hours of moonshine smile—
And then she looks so modest all the while.

There is a dangerous silence in that hour,
A stillness, which leaves room for the full soul
To open all itself, without the power
Of calling completely back its self-control;
The silver light which, making holy tree and tower,
Sheds beauty and deep softness over the whole,
Breathes also to the heart, and over it throws
A loving laziness, which is not rest.

And Julia satisfy with Juan, half hugged/supported
And half retiring from the glowing arm,
Which shook (with fear or emotion) like the chest where 't was placed;
Yet still she must have thought there was no harm,
Or else 't were easy to withdraw her waist;
But then the situation had its charm,
And then—God knows what next—I can't go on;
I 'm almost sorry that I ever begun.

O Plato! Plato! you have paved the way,
With your confused fantasies, to more
Socially wrong behavior by the imagined sway
Your system fakes over the controulless core
Of human hearts, than all the long array
Of poets and romancers:—You 're a bore,
A liar, a snob/flower—and have been,
At best, no better than a go-between.

And Julia's voice was lost, except in sighs,
Until too late for useful conversation;
The tears were gushing from her gentle eyes,
I wish in fact they had not had occasion,
But who, (what a shame)! can love, and then be wise?
Not that shame and guilt did not argue (against) (something that makes you want to do something/the feeling of wanting to do something);
A little still she tried, and much feel deep sorrow for past sined
And whispering 'I will never consent'—gave permission.

It is said that Xerxes offered a reward
To those who could invent him a new pleasure:
I think the request (for supplies) 's rather hard,
And must have cost his majesty a treasure:
For my part, I 'm a moderate-minded poet,
Fond of a little love (which I call fun/relaxation);
I care not for new pleasures, as the old
Are enough for me, so they but hold.

O Pleasure! you are in fact a pleasant thing,
Although one must be damned for you, no doubt:
I make a resolution every spring
Of reformation, before the year run out,
But somehow, this my (virgin-related) serious promise flies,
Yet still, I trust it may be kept throughout:
I 'm very sorry, very much ashamed,
And mean, next winter, to be quite took/got again.

Here my (not involved with sex or sex-related things) Art goddess a freedom must take—
Start not! still (not involved with sex or sex-related things)r reader—she 'll be nice hence—
Forward, and there is no great cause to shake/earthquake;
This freedom is a poetic licence,
Which some suspicious thing/mistake may make
In the design, and as I have a high sense
Of Aristotle and the Rules, it is fit
To beg his pardon when I make mistakes a bit.

This licence is to hope the reader will
Suppose from June the sixth (the deadly day,
Without whose period of time in history my poetic skill
For lack of facts would all be thrown away),
But keeping Julia and Don Juan still
In sight, that (more than two, but not a lot of) months have passed; we 'll say
It was in November, but I 'm not so sure
About the day—the time in history 's more unknown.

We 'll talk of that soon.—'T is sweet to hear
At midnight on the blue and moonlit deep
The song and oar of Adria's gondolier,
By distance mellow'd, over the waters sweep;
It is sweet to see the evening star appear;
It is sweet to listen as the night-winds creep
From leaf to leaf; it is sweet to view on high
The rainbow, based on ocean, span the sky.

It is sweet to hear the watch-dog's honest bark
Bay deep-mouth'd welcome as we draw near home;
It is sweet to know there is an eye will mark
Our coming, and look brighter when we come;
It is sweet to be awaken'd by the fun adventure/bird,
Or lull'd by falling waters; sweet the hum
Of bees, the voice of girls, the song of birds,
The lisp of children, and their earliest words.

Sweet is the old/original, when the showering grapes
In Drunken party large amount reel to earth,
Purple and gushing: sweet are our escapes
From (related to the responsibility of being a member of society) partying to (away from cities) happiness;
Sweet to the cheap person are his shining and twinkling (like jewelry) heaps,
Sweet to the father is his first-born's birth,
Sweet is revenge—especially to women,
Destroy to soldiers, prize-money to seamen.

Sweet is a (something given to future people), and passing sweet
The unexpected death of some old lady
Or gentleman of seventy years complete,
Who 've made 'us youth' wait too—too long already
For an estate, or cash, or country seat,
Still breaking, but with the ability to work hard for a long time so steady
That all the Israelites are fit to mob its
Next owner for their double-damned after-(descriptions of people who died).

It is sweet to win, no matter how, one's laurels,
By blood or ink; it is sweet to put an end
To battle(s)/tension; it is sometimes sweet to have our quarrels,
Especially with a boring and annoying friend:
Sweet is old wine in bottles, alcoholic drink in barrels;
Dear is the helpless creature we defend
Against the world; and dear the schoolboy spot
We never forget, though there we are forgot.

But sweeter still than this, than these, than all,
Is first and emotional (in a good way) love—it stands alone,
Like Adam's memory of his fall;
The tree of knowledge has been plucked—all 's known—
And life yields nothing further to recall
Worthy of this delicious sin, so shown,
No doubt in story, as the unforgiven
Fire which Prometheus steal'd for us from heaven.

Man 's a strange animal, and makes strange use
Of his own nature, and the different arts,
And likes especially to produce
Some new experiment to show his parts;
This is the age of strange things let loose,
Where different talents find their different marts;
You 'd best begin with truth, and when you 've lost your
Labour, there 's a sure market for disguising himself/herself.

What opposite discoveries we have seen!
(Signs of true genius, and of empty pockets.)
One makes new noses, one a (device that chopped off human heads),
One breaks your bones, one sets them in their sockets;
But vaccination certainly has been
A kind opposite to Congreve's rockets,
With which the Doctor paid off an old pox,
By borrowing a new one from an ox.

Bread has been made ((not caring one way or the other)) from potatoes;
And galvanism has set some dead bodies grinning,
But has not answered like the mechanical device
Of the Kind (community of people/all good people in the world)'s beginning
By which men are unsuffocated free:
What amazing new machines have late been spinning!
I said the small-pox has gone out of late;
Maybe it may be followed by the great.

It is said the great came from America;
Maybe it may set out on its return,—
The population there so spreads, they say
It is grown high time to thin it in its turn,
With war, or disease, or widespread death from starving, any way,
So that civilisation they may learn;
And which in destroy the more disgusting evil is—
Their real lues, or our almost-(sexually transmitted disease)?

This is the patent-age of new inventions
For killing bodies, and for saving souls,
All spread with the best plans/desires;
Sir Humphry Davy's lamp, by which coals
Are safely mined for in the mode he talks about/says,
Graveuctoo travels, trips to the Poles,
Are ways to benefit people, as true,
Maybe, as shooting them at Waterloo.

Man 's an important thing/big event, one knows not what,
And wonderful beyond all amazing measure;
It is pity though, in this amazing world, that
Pleasure 's a sin, and sometimes sin 's a pleasure;
Few people know what end they would be at,
But whether glory, power, or love, or treasure,
The path is through confusing ways, and when
The goal is gained, we die, you know—and then—

What then?—I do not know, no more do you—
And so good night.—Return we to our story:
It was in November, when fine days are few,
And the far mountains wax a little old and gray,
And clap a white cape on their mantles blue;
And the sea dashes round the high point,
And the loud breaker boils against the rock,
And sober suns must set at five o'clock.

It was, as the watchmen say, a cloudy night;
No moon, no stars, the wind was low or loud
By gusts, and many a sparkling fireplace was bright
With the piled wood, round which the family crowd;
There 's something cheerful in that sort of light,
Even as a summer sky 's without a cloud:
I 'm fond of fire, and crickets, and all that,
A lobster salad, and bubbly wine, and chat.

It was midnight—Donna Julia was in bed,
Sleeping, most probably,—when at her door
Rose up a noise might awake the dead,
If they had never been awoke before,
And that they have been so we all have read,
And are to be so, at the least, once more.--
The door was fastened, but with voice and fist
First knocks were heard, then 'Madam—Madam—hist!

'For God's benefit (of something or someone), Madam—Madam—here 's my master,
With more than half the city at his back—
Was ever heard of such a curst disaster!
It is not my fault—I kept good watch—(what a shame!)!
Do pray undo the bolt a little faster—
They 're on the stair just now, and in a crack
Will all be here; maybe he yet may fly—
Surely the window 's not so very high!'

By this time Don Alfonso was arrived,
With torches, friends, and servants in great number;
The major part of them had long been wived,
And therefore paused not to disturb the slumber
Of any evil woman, who pland
By sneaky silence her husband's temples to slow down:
Examples of this kind are so (able to be caught from other people),
Were one not punished, all would be terrible and shocking.

I can't tell how, or why, or what (feeling that something is wrong or bad, but without proof)
Could enter into Don Alfonso's head;
But for an uncaring (about something important) of his condition
It surely was very (rude and low-class),
Without a word of previous warning,
To hold a levee round his lady's bed,
And call for (people who are ridiculously over-helpful to other people), armed with fire and sword,
To prove himself the thing he most hater'd.

Poor Donna Julia, starting as from sleep
(Mind—that I do not say—she had not slept),
Began at once to scream, and yawn, and cry;
Her maid Antonia, who was a (good at doing something),
Planned to throw/sexual relationship the bed-clothes in a heap,
As if she had just now from out them walked (slowly and quietly):
I can't tell why she should take all this trouble
To prove her mistress had been sleeping double.

But Julia mistress, and Antonia maid,
Appeared like two poor harmless women, who
Of (ugly, trouble-making animals), but still more of men afraid,
Had thought one man might be deterr'd by two,
And therefore side by side were gently laid,
Until the hours of (not being there; not being present) should run through,
And (like a child who refuses to go to school) husband should return, and say,
'My dear, I was the first who came away.'

Now Julia found at length a voice, and cried,
'In heaven's name, Don Alfonso, what d' you mean?
Has madness grabbed and took control of you? would that I had died
Before such a monster's victim I had been!
What may this midnight violence happen to,
A sudden fit of drunkenness or (organ that stores blood)?
Dare you suspect me, whom the thought would kill?
Search, then, the room!'—Alfonso said, 'I will.'

He searched, they searched, and rummaged everywhere,
Closet and clothes' press, chest and window-seat,
And found much linen, lace, and (more than two, but not a lot of) pair
Of stockings, slippers, brushes, combs, complete,
With other articles of ladies fair,
To keep them beautiful, or leave them neat:
Hanging wall curtain they pricked and curtains with their swords,
And wounded (more than two, but not a lot of) shutters, and some boards.

Under the bed they searched, and there they found—
No matter what—it was not that they searched for/tried to get;
They opened windows, looking if the ground
Had signs or footmarks, but the earth said nothing;
And then they stared each other's faces round:
It is odd, not one of all these searchers (for something) thought,
And seems to me almost a sort of blunder,
Of looking in the bed as well as under.

During this (difficult and harsh investigation), Julia's tongue
Was not asleep—'Yes, search and search,' she cried,
'Insult on insult heap, and wrong on wrong!
It was for this that I became a bride!
For this in silence I have suffer'd long
A husband like Alfonso at my side;
But now I 'll bear no more, nor here remain,
If there be law or lawyers in all Spain.

'Yes, Don Alfonso! husband now no more,
If ever you in fact deserved the name,
Is 't worthy of your years?—you have sixty—
Fifty, or sixty, it is all the same—
Is 't wise or fitting, without cause to explore
For facts against a honest and good woman's fame?
Unthankful, lied in court, extremely cruel and animal-like Don Alfonso,
How dare you think your lady would go on so?

'Is it for this I have disdain'd to hold
The common privileges of my sex?
That I have chosen a (priest who listens to people admitting bad things) so old
And (unable to hear), that any other it would frustrate and irritate,
And never once he has had cause to yell at (for bad behavior),
But found my very innocence confuse
So much, he always doubted I was married—
How sorry you will be when I 've miscarried!

'Was it for this that no Cortejo ever
I yet have chosen from out the youth of Seville?
Is it for this I rare/not enough went anywhere,
Except to bull-fights, mass, play, embarrassing loss, and revel?
Is it for this, whatever my romantic interests were,
I favor'd none—no, was almost rude?
Is it for this that General Count O'Reilly,
Who took Algiers, declares I used him in an evil way?

'Did not the Italian Musico Cazzani
Sing at my heart six months at least without success (or without purpose)?
Did not his another person who lives in the same country, Count Corniani,
Call me the only honest and good wife in Spain?
Were there not also Russians, English, many?
The Count Strongstroganoff I put in pain,
And Lord Mount Coffeehouse, the Irish (person who is in a similar age group or academic field),
Who killed himself for love (with wine) last year.

'Have I not had two (supervisors of several churches) at my feet,
The Duke of Ichar, and Don Fernan Nunez?
And is it this way a faithful wife you treat?
I wonder in what quarter now the moon is:
I praise your huge delay not to beat
Me also, since the time so good is—
O, brave man! with sword drawn and cock'd trigger,
Now, tell me, don't you cut a pretty figure?

'Was it for this you took your sudden trip.
Under dishonesty/pretending of business extremely important
With that amazing of mischievous people your lawyer,
Whom I see standing there, and looking (reasonable/showing good judgment)
Of having played the fool? though both I reject, he
Deserves the worst, his behavior 's less reasonable,
Because, no doubt, 't was for his dirty fee,
And not from any love to you nor me.

'If he comes here to take a (removal from a ruling position)/legal statement under oath,
By all means let the gentleman go ahead/move forward;
You 've made the apartment in a fit condition:
There 's pen and ink for you, sir, when you need—
Let every thing be noted with (high) quality,
I would not you for nothing should be fee'd—
But, as my maid 's undrest, pray turn your spies out.'
'Oh!' sobb'd Antonia, 'I could tear their eyes out.'

'There is the closet, there the toilet, there
The waiting room—search them under, over;
There is the sofa, there the great arm-chair,
The chimney—which would really hold a lover.
I wish to sleep, and beg you will take care
And make no further noise, till you discover
The secret cave of this waiting (in a creepy way) treasure—
And when it is found, let me, too, have that pleasure.

'And now, Hidalgo! now that you have thrown
Doubt upon me, confusion over all,
Pray have the kindness/politeness to make it known
Who is the man you search for? how d' you cal
Him? what 's his family? let him but be shown—
I hope he 's young and attractive—is he tall?
Tell me—and be sure, that since you stain
My honor this way, it will not be without success (or without purpose).

'At least, maybe, he has not sixty years,
At that age he would be too old for murder,
Or for so young a husband's jealous fears
(Antonia! let me have a glass of water).
I am ashamed of having shed these tears,
They are unworthy of my father's daughter;
My mother dreamed not in my (related to the birth of a baby) hour
That I should fall into a monster's power.

'Perhaps it is of Antonia you are jealous,
You saw that she was sleeping by my side
When you broke in upon us with your fellows:
Look where you please—we 've nothing, sir, to hide;
Only another time, I trust, you 'll tell us,
Or for the benefit of decency accept/tolerate/obey
A moment at the door, that we may be
Drest to receive so much good company.

'And now, sir, I have done, and say no more;
The little I have said may serve to show
The honest heart in silence may suffer (because of death) over
The wrongs to whose exposure it is slow:
I leave you to your sense of right and wrong as before,
'T will one day ask you why you used me so?
God grant you feel not then the angriest/worst-tasting sadness (about death)!-
Antonia! where 's my pocket-handkerchief?'

She stopped, and turned upon her pillow; pale
She lay, her dark eyes flashing through their tears,
Like skies that rain and lighten; as a cover,
Waved and overshading her pale cheek, appears
Her streaming hair; the black curls try, but fail,
To hide the glossy shoulder, which uprears
Its snow through all;—her soft lips lie apart,
And louder than her breathing beats her heart.

The Senhor Don Alfonso stood confused;
Antonia hurried round the wildly search'd room,
And, turning up her nose, with looks (treated or used in a very mean, unfair way)
Her master and his loyal followers, of whom
Not one, except the lawyer, was mildly happy;
He, like Achates, faithful to the grave,
So there were arguments, cared not for the cause,
Knowing they must be settled by the laws.

With prying snub-nose, and small eyes, he stood,
Following Antonia's movements here and there,
With much (feeling that something is wrong or bad, but without proof) in his attitude;
For reputations he had little care;
So that a suit or action were made good,
Small pity had he for the young and fair,
And never believed in negatives, till these
Were proved by (able to do something well/very good) false witnesses.

But Don Alfonso stood with down-looking looks,
And, truth to say, he made a foolish figure;
When, after searching in five hundred nooks,
And treating a young wife with so much rigour,
He gained no point, except some self-rebukes,
Added to those his lady with such energy
Had poured upon him for the last half-hour,
Quick, thick, and heavy—as a thunder-shower.

At first he tried to hammer an excuse,
To which the only reply was tears and cries,
And indications of (uncontrolled emotional outbursts), whose
(first or introductory scene) is always certain (very upset feelings), and painfully beats,
(sudden, short breaths in), and whatever else the owners choose:
Alfonso saw his wife, and thought of Job's;
He saw too, in (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important), her relations,
And then he tried to gather all his patience.

He stood in act to speak, or rather talk unclearly,
But smart Antonia cut him short before
The anvil of his speech received the hammer,
With 'Pray, sir, leave the room, and say no more,
Or madam dies.'—Alfonso mumble'd, 'D—n her,'
But nothing else, the time of words was over;
He cast a sad look or two, and did,
He did not know why, that which he was bid.

With him retired his 'posse comitatus,'
The lawyer last, who stayed around near the door
(in a slow way, full of doubt), still staying/being late there as late as
Antonia let him—not a little sore
At this most strange and unexplain'd 'hiatus'
In Don Alfonso's facts, which just now wore
An awkward look; as he revolved the case,
The door was fastened in his legal face.

No sooner was it locked with a bolt/ran away, than—Oh shame!
O sin! Oh sadness! and oh womankind!
How can you do such things and keep your fame,
Unless this world, and t' other too, be blind?
Nothing so dear as an unfilch'd good name!
But to go ahead/move forward—for there is more behind:
With much emotional (feelings of doubt and hesitation) be it said,
Young Juan slipp'd half-smother'd, from the bed.

He had been hid—I don't pretend to say
How, nor can I in fact describe the where—
Young, thin, and pack'd easily, he lay,
No doubt, in little compass, round or square;
But pity him I neither must nor may
His suffocation by that pretty pair;
'T were better, sure, to die so, than be shut
With (trying to be sad, but overdoing it emotionally) Clarence in his Malmsey butt.

And, secondly, I pity not, because
He had no business to commit a sin,
Forbid by heavenly, fined by human laws,
At least 't was rather early to begin;
But at sixteen the sense of right and wrong rarely chews
So much as when we call our old (money owed) in
At sixty years, and draw the accompts of evil,
And find a deuced balance with the devil.

Of his position I can give no idea/plan:
It is written in the Hebrew Story,
How the doctors, leaving pill and potion,
Prescribed, by way of (wet, oozing sore), a young belle,
When old King David's blood grew dull in motion,
And that the medicine answered very well;
Maybe 't was in a different way applied,
For David lived, but Juan nearly died.

What 's to be done? Alfonso will be back
The moment he has sent his fools away.
Antonia's skill was put upon the rack,
But no device could be brought into play—
And how to avoid the renewed attack?
Besides, it wanted but few hours of day:
Antonia confused; Julia did not speak,
But pressed her bloodless lip to Juan's cheek.

He turned his lip to hers, and with his hand
Called back the tangles of her wandering hair;
Even then their love they could not all command,
And half forgot their danger and feelings that there is no hope:
Antonia's patience now was at a stand—
'Come, come, it is no time now for fooling there,'
She whisper'd, in great anger—'I must deposit
This pretty gentleman within the closet:

'Pray, keep your nonsense for some luckier night—
Who can have put my master in this mood?
What will become on 't—I 'm in such a fright,
The devil 's in the small, troublemaking boy, and no good—
Is this a time for giggling? this a trouble(s)?
Why, don't you know that it may end in blood?
You 'll lose your life, and I will lose my place,
My mistress all, for that half-girlish face.

'Had it but been for a heavy/brave/strong cavalier
Of twenty-five or thirty (come, hurry)—
But for a child, what piece of work is here!
I really, madam, wonder at your taste
(Come, sir, get in)—my master must be near:
There, for the present, at the least, he's fast,
And if we can but till the morning keep
Our counsel—(Juan, mind, you must not sleep).'

Now, Don Alfonso entering, but alone,
Closed the speech of the trusty maid:
She hang around/waste time'd, and he told her to be gone,
An order somewhat quietly and with anger obeyed;
However, present fix (for a disease) was none,
And no great good seemed answered if she stayed:
(related to/looking at/thinking about) both with slow and sidelong view,
She snuff'd the candle, (bowed with respect, with a knee bend), and withdrew.

Alfonso paused a minute—then begun
Some strange excuses for his late going ahead/moving forward;
He would not give a good reason for what he had done,
To say the best, it was extreme (bad or poorly)-breeding;
But there were big/enough reasons for it, none
Of which he specified in this his pleading:
His speech was a fine sample, on the whole,
Of (attention-getting talk), which the learned call 'rigmarole.'

Julia said nothing; though all the while there rose
A ready answer, which at once enables
A mother, who her husband's weakness knows,
By a few appropriately-timed words to turn the tables,
Which, if it does not silence, still must present/ask/stand in a showy and fake way,—
Even if it should contain/make up a pack of stories;
It is to answer back with firmness, and when he
Suspects with one, do you criticism with three.

Julia, in fact, had OK grounds,—
Alfonso's loves with Inez were well known,
But whether 't was that one's own guilt confuses—
But that can't be, as has been often shown,
A lady with apologies is full of;—
It might be that her silence (suddenly jumped up, like a spring) alone
From great care/delicious thing to Don Juan's ear,
To whom she knew his mother's fame was dear.

There might be one more reason (for doing something), which makes two;
Alfonso never to Juan had hinted-at,—
Talk about/say'd his jealousy but never who
Had been the happy lover, he ended/decided,
Hidden among his (reasons for doing or saying something); it is true,
His mind the more over this its mystery sadly thought;
To speak of Inez now were, one may say,
Like throwing Juan in Alfonso's way.

A hint, in tender cases, is enough;
Silence is best, besides there is a tact
(That modern phrase appears to me sad stuff,
But it will serve to keep my verse compact)—
Which keeps, when push'd by questions rather rough,
A lady always distant from the fact:
The charming creatures lie with such a grace,
There 's nothing so becoming to the face.

They (go red in the cheeks from embarrassment), and we believe them; at least I
Have always done so; it is of no great use,
In any case, attempting a reply,
For then their ability to speak clearly and beautifully grows quite generous;
And when at length they 're out of breath, they sigh,
And cast their tired and slow eyes down, and let loose
A tear or two, and then we make it up;
And then—and then—and then—sit down and eat supper.

Alfonso closed his speech, and begg'd her pardon,
Which Julia half held back, and then half granted,
And laid conditions he thought very hard on,
Denying (more than two, but not a lot of) little things he wanted:
He stood like Adam (staying around; not going away) near his garden,
With useless sorrow for sin confuse'd and haunted,
Begging she no further would refuse,
When, lo! he (tripped while walking/made a mistake) over a pair of shoes.

A pair of shoes!—what then? not much, if they
Are such as fit with ladies' feet, but these
(No one can tell how much I suffer (because of death) to say)
Were masculine; to see them, and to grab and take control of,
Was only a moment's act.—Ah! well-a-day!
My teeth begin to talk, my veins freeze—
Alfonso first examined well their fashion,
And then flew out into another passion.

He left the room for his give up'd sword,
And Julia instant to the closet flew.
'Fly, Juan, fly! so heaven remains a good place—not a word—
The door is open—you may yet slip through
The passage you so often have explored—
Here is the garden-key—Fly—fly—Goodbye!
(hurrying/foolish rushing)—(hurrying/foolish rushing)! I hear Alfonso's hurrying feet—
Day has not broke—there 's no one in the street:

None can say that this was not good (opinions about what could or should be done about a situation),
The only mischief was, it came too late;
Of all experience it is the usual price,
A sort of income-tax laid on by (the) unavoidable, already-decided future:
Juan had reached the room-door in a. trice,
And might have done so by the garden-gate,
But met Alfonso in his dressing-gown,
Who threaten'd death—so Juan knock'd him down.

Terrible and serious was the fight, and out went the light;
Antonia cried out 'Rape!' and Julia 'Fire!'
But not a servant stirred to aid the fight.
Alfonso, pommell'd to his heart's desire,
Swore energetically (and with sex on the mind) he'd be revenged this night;
And Juan, too, insulted God an octave higher;
His blood was up: though young, he was a Tartar,
And not at all likely to prove a (someone who dies or suffers a lot rather than gives up what he or she believes in).

Alfonso's sword had dropped before he could draw it,
And they continued fighting hand to hand,
For Juan very luckily never saw it;
His temper not being under great command,
If at that moment he had accidentally happened to claw it,
Alfonso's days had not been in the land
Much longer.—Think of husbands', lovers' lives!
And how you may be doubly widows—wives!

Alfonso wrestled to detain the enemy,
And Juan (controlled the speed of a device/choked) him to get away,
And blood ('t was from the nose) began to flow;
At last, as they more faintly wrestling lay,
Juan planned to give an awkward blow,
And then his only article of clothing quite gave way;
He ran away/escaped, like Joseph, leaving it; but there,
I doubt, all likeness ends between the pair.

Lights came at length, and men, and young women/cleaning women, who found
An awkward sight to see their eyes before;
Antonia in (uncontrolled emotional outbursts), Julia swoon'd,
Alfonso leaning, (having difficulty breathing/very nervous or worried), by the door;
Some half-torn drapery scatter'd on the ground,
Some blood, and (more than two, but not a lot of) footsteps, but no more:
Juan the gate gained, turned the key about,
And liking not the inside, locked the out.

Here ends this (part of a poem).—Need I sing, or say,
How Juan naked, favour'd by the night,
Who favours what she should not, found his way,
And reached his home in an inappropriate trouble(s)?
The pleasant (shameful and disgraceful act or situation) which rose up next day,
The nine days' wonder which was brought to light,
And how Alfonso sued for a divorce,
Were in the English newspapers, of course.

If you would like to see the whole (series of events),
The legal statements under oath, and the cause at full,
The names of all the witnesses, the pleadings
Of advice to nonsuit, or to make legally invalid,
There 's more than one edition, and the readings
Are different, but they none of them are dull;
The best is that in short-hand taken by Gurney,
Who to Madrid on purpose made a trip.

But Donna Inez, to (change to flow on a different path/change to point to, or focus on, something else) the train
Of one of the most circulating (shameful or disgraceful acts or situations)
That had for centuries been known in Spain,
At least since the retirement of the Vandals,
First vow'd (and never had she vow'd without success (or without purpose))
To Virgin Mary (more than two, but not a lot of) pounds of candles;
And then, by the (opinions about what could or should be done about a situation) of some old ladies,
She sent her son to be shipp'd off from Cadiz.

She had resolved that he should travel through
All (related to Europe) climates, by land or sea,
To fix his former morals, and get new,
Especially in France and Italy
(At least this is the thing most people do).
Julia was sent into a convent: she
Suffered (from a loss), but, maybe, her feelings may be better
Shown in the following copy of her Letter:—

'They tell me it is decided; you leave/move away from:
It is wise—'t is well, but not the less a pain;
I have no further claim on your young heart,
Mine is the victim, and would be again;
To love too much has been the only art
I used;—I write in (hurrying/foolish rushing), and if a stain
Be on this sheet, it is not what it appears;
My eyeballs burn and throb, but have no tears.

'I loved, I love you, for this love have lost
State, station, heaven, people's, my own respect,
And yet can not regret what it has cost,
So dear is still the memory of that dream;
Yet, if I name my guilt, it is not to brag,
None can think of/consider harshlier of me than I think of/consider:
I trace this write/writing because I cannot rest—
I 've nothing to criticize, or to request.

'Man's love is of man's life a thing apart,
It is woman's whole existence; man may range
The court, camp, church, the tube (in the body), and the mart;
Sword, gown, gain, glory, offer in exchange
Pride, fame, desire to do great things, to fill up his heart,
And few there are whom these cannot abandon;
Men have all these useful things/valuable supplies, we but one,
To love again, and be again undone.

'You will go ahead/move forward in pleasure, and in pride,
Loved and loving many; all is over
For me on earth, except some years to hide
My shame and sadness deep in my heart's core;
These I could bear, but cannot cast aside
The passion which still (screams and acts violently) as before—
And so goodbye—forgive me, love me—No,
That word is (not operating or working now, but able to) now—but let it go.

'My breast has been all weakness, is so yet;
But still I think I can collect my mind;
My blood still rushes where my spirit 's set,
As roll the waves before the settled wind;
My heart is feminine, nor can forget—
To all, except one image, madly blind;
So shakes the needle, and so stands the pole,
As vibrates my fond heart to my fixed soul.

'I have no more to say, but stay around still,
And dare not set my seal upon this sheet,
And yet I may as well the job fulfil,
My extreme unhappiness/extreme pain can rare/not enough be more complete:
I had not lived till now, could sadness kill;
Death avoids the miserable, awful person who pleased/with pleasure the blow would meet,
And I must even survive this last goodbye,
And deal with life, to love and pray for you!'

This note was written upon (covered with a very thin layer of gold)-edged paper
With a neat little crow-quill, small/short and new:
Her small white hand could hardly reach the thin candle,
It shook (with fear or emotion) as magnetic needles do,
And yet she did not let one tear escape her;
The seal a sun-flower; 'Elle vous suit partout,'
The saying cut upon a white cornelian;
The wax was superfine, its color dark red.

This was Don Juan's earliest scrape; but whether
I will go ahead/move forward with his fun trips is
Dependent on the public completely;
We 'll see, however, what they say to this:
Their favour in an author's cap 's a feather,
And no great mischief 's done by their moodiness;
And if their approval we experience,
Maybe they 'll have some more about a year from now.

My poem 's hugely important (work), and is meant to be
Divided in twelve books; each book containing,
With love, and war, a heavy strong wind at sea,
A list of ships, and captains, and kings ruling,
New characters; the episodes are three:
A very wide view of hell 's in training,
After the style of Virgil and of Homer,
So that my name of Hugely important (work) 's no wrong name.

All these things will be specified in time,
With strict regard to Aristotle's rules,
The Vade Mecum of the true amazing,
Which makes so many poets, and some fools:
Writing poets like blank-verse, I 'm fond of rhyme,
Good workmen never argue with their tools;
I 've got new (related to very old stories) machinery,
And very attractive supernatural scenery.

There 's only one small/short difference between
Me and my huge/famous brothers gone before,
And here the advantage is my own, I ween
(Not that I have not (more than two, but not a lot of) good qualities more,
But this will more weirdly be seen);
They so add to/decorate, that it is quite a bore
Their maze of stories to thread through,
Whereas this story 's actually true.

If any person doubt it, I appeal
To history, tradition, and to facts,
To newspapers, whose truth all know and feel,
To plays in five, and operas in three acts;
All these confirm my statement a good deal,
But that which more completely faith takes
Is that myself, and (more than two, but not a lot of) now in Seville,
Saw Juan's last (secret marriage) with the devil.

If ever I should talk down to to writing,
I 'll write poem-related commandments, which
Will replace beyond all doubt all those
That went before; in these I will enrich
My text with many things that no one knows,
And carry rule to the highest pitch:
I 'll call the work 'Longinus over a Bottle,
Or, Every Poet his own Aristotle.'

You will believe in Milton, Dryden, Pope;
You will not set up Wordsworth, Coleridge, Southey;
Because the first is crazed beyond all hope,
The second drunk, the third so attractively old-fashioned and mouthy:
With Crabbe it may be very hard to cope,
And Campbell's Hippocrene is somewhat drouthy:
You will not steal from Samuel Rogers, nor
Commit—flirtation with the art goddess of Moore.

You will not want Mr. Sotheby's Art goddess,
His Pegasus, nor anything that 's his;
You will not bear false witness like 'the Blues'
(There 's one, at least, is very fond of this);
You will not write, in short, but what I choose:
This is true criticism, and you may kiss—
Exactly as you please, or not,—the rod;

If any person should assume to strongly defend/strongly express
This story is not moral, first, I pray,
That they will not cry out before they 're hurt,
Then that they 'll read it over again, and say
(But, definitely, nobody will be so pert)
That this is not a moral story, though gay;
Besides, in (part of a poem) Twelfth, I mean to show
The very place where evil people go.

If, after all, there should be some so blind
To their own good this warning to hate,
Led by some tortuosity of mind,
Not to believe my verse and their own eyes,
And cry that they 'the moral cannot find,'
I tell him, if a (priest, bishop, deacon, etc.), he lies;
Should captains the remark, or people (who say bad things or give opinions), make,
They also lie too—under a mistake.

The public approval I expect,
And beg they 'll take my word about the moral,
Which I with their mild happiness/interesting thing will connect
(So children cutting teeth receive a coral);
Meantime, they 'll definitely please to remember
My epical snobbiness to the laurel:
For fear some strict readers should grow nervous,
I 've (paid money to someone to get favors) my grandmother's review—the British.

I sent it in a letter to the Editor,
Who thank'd me duly by return of after---
I 'm for an attractive article his (company that lends money);
Yet, if my gentle Art goddess he please to roast,
And break a promise after having made it her,
Denying the receipt of what it cost,
And smear his page with rude boldness instead of honey,
All I can say is—that he had the money.

I think that with this holy new friendly partnership
I may secure/make sure of the public, and fight against
All other magazines of art or science,
Daily, or monthly, or three monthly; I
Have not (written opinion)'d to multiply their clients,
Because they tell me 't were without success (or without purpose) to try,
And that the Edinburgh Review and Quarterly
Treat a disagreeing author very (someone who dies or suffers a lot rather than gives up what he or she believes in)ly.

'Non self-image/snobbiness hoc ferrem calida juventa
Consule Planco,' Horace said, and so
Say I; by which quotation there is meant a
Hint that some six or seven good years ago
(Long before I dreamed of dating from the Brenta)
I was most ready to return a blow,
And would not tolerate at all this sort of thing
In my hot youth—when George the Third was King.

But now at thirty years my hair is grey
(I wonder what it will be like at forty?
I thought of a wig the other day)—
My heart is not much greener; and, in short, I
Have waste'd my whole summer while 't was May,
And feel no more the spirit to answer back; I
Have spent my life, both interest and principal,
And think of/consider not, what I thought of/considered, my soul unbeatable.

No more—no more—Oh! never more on me
The freshness of the heart can fall like dew,
Which out of all the lovely things we see
Extracts feelings of love, hate, fear, etc. beautiful and new,
Hived in our (chest/souls) like the bag of the bee:
Think you the honey with those objects grew?
(what a shame)! 't was not in them, but in your power
To double even the sweetness of a flower.

No more—no more—Oh! never more, my heart,
Can you be my only world, my universe!
Once all in all, but now a thing apart,
You can not be my blessing or my curse:
The fake image 's gone for ever, and you are
Emotionally cold, I trust, but none the worse,
And in your stead I 've got a deal of judgment,
Though heaven knows how it ever found a lodgment.

My days of love are over; me no more
The charms of maid, wife, and still less of widow,
Can make the fool of which they made before,—
In short, I must not lead the life I did do;
The trusting hope of back and forth/equal between people minds is over,
The generous/many use of claret is forbid too,
So for a good old-gentlemanly crime/harmful behavior,
I think I must take up with greed.

Desire to do great things was my idol, which was broken
Before the shrines of Sadness, and of Pleasure;
And the two last have left me many a symbol/symbolic
Over which reflection may be made at fun/relaxation:
Now, like Friar Bacon's shockingly bold head, I 've spoken,
'Time is, Time was, Time 's past:'—a chymic treasure
Is shining and twinkling (like jewelry) youth, which I have spent betimes—
My heart in passion, and my head on rhymes.

What is the end of Fame? it is but to fill
A certain part of/amount of uncertain paper:
Some compare it to climbing up a hill,
Whose summit, like all hills, is lost in vapour;
For this men write, speak, preach, and heroes kill,
And poets burn what they call their 'midnight taper,'
To have, when the original is dust,
A name, a miserable and unfortunate picture, and worse bust.

What are the hopes of man? Old Egypt's King
Cheops built the first pyramid
And largest, thinking it was just the thing
To keep his memory whole, and mummy hid;
But somebody or other rummaging,
Criminal (who steals from inside buildings)iously broke his coffin's lid:
Let not a monument give you or me hopes,
Since not a pinch of dust remains of Cheops.

But I being fond of true (way of thinking/related to learning about how people think),
Say very often to myself, 'Alas!
All things that have been born were born to die,
And flesh (which Death mows down to hay) is grass;
You 've passed your youth not so unpleasantly,
And if you had it over again—'t would pass—
So thank your stars that matters are no worse,
And read your Bible, sir, and mind your purse.'

But for the present, gentle reader! and
Still gentler purchaser! the bard—that 's I—
Must, with permission, shake you by the hand,
And so 'Your humble servant, and good-b'ye!'
We meet again, if we should understand
Each other; and if not, I will not try
Your patience further than by this short sample—
'T were well if others followed my example.

'Go, little book, from this my quiet aloneness!
I cast you on the waters—go your ways!
And if, as I believe, your vein be good,
The world will find you after many days.'
When Southey's read, and Wordsworth understood,
I can't help putting in my claim to praise—
The four first rhymes are Southey's every line:
So God is pleased/my goodness, reader! take them not for mine.