Of all the extremely cruel and animal-like middle ages, that
Which is most extremely cruel and animal-like is the middle age
Of man; it is—I really rare/not enough know what;
But when we (float/stay close) between fool and smart,
And don't know justly what we would be at—
A period something like a printed page,
Black letter upon foolscap, while our hair
Grows gray, and we are not what we were;—

Too old for youth,—too young, at thirty-five,
To collect together (animals) with boys, or collection with good sixty,—
I wonder people should be left alive;
But since they are, that period of time in history is a bore:
Love stays around still, although 't were late to wive;
And as for other love, the fake image 's over;
And money, that most (completely/complete, with nothing else mixed in) imagination,
Shines only through the dawn of its creation.

O Gold! Why call we cheap people terrible (and very unhappy)?
Theirs is the pleasure that can never lessen;
Theirs is the best leafy house (read news on TV/person who reads news on TV), the chain cable
Which holds fast other pleasures great and small.
You who but see the saving man at table,
And reject/rejection his mild/not extreme board, as none at all,
And wonder how the wealthy can be sparing,
Do not know what visions spring from each cheese-reducing/cutting down.

Love or sexual desire makes man sick, and wine much sicker;
Desire to do great things tears apart, and gaming gains a loss;
But making money, slowly first, then quicker,
And adding still a little through each cross
(Which will come over things), beats love or liquor,
The (playful person)'s counter, or the person (who is a very wise leader in government)'s trash.
O Gold! I still prefer you unto paper,
Which makes bank credit like a bank of vapour.

Who hold the balance of the world? Who rule
Over congress, whether royalist or liberal?
Who awaken the shirtless patriots of Spain?
(That make old Europe's journals squeak and talk nonsense all.)
Who keep the world, both old and new, in pain
Or pleasure? Who make politics run (more offensive because of joking comments that should be serious) all?
The shade of Buonaparte's noble daring?-
Jew Rothschild, and his fellow-Christian, Baring.

Those, and the truly liberal Lafitte,
Are the true lords of Europe. Every loan
Is not only a littlely based on guessing/guessed hit,
But seats a nation or upsets a (seat of power of a king or queen).
Republics also get involved a bit;
Columbia's stock has holders not unknown
On 'Change; and even your silver soil, Peru,
Must get itself discounted by a Jew.

Why call the cheap person terrible (and very unhappy)? as
I said before: the money-saving life is his,
Which in a saint or negative person who doesn't trust people ever was
The theme of praise: a person (who lives alone and avoids others) would not miss
(declaring as a saint) for the same cause,
And why blame very thin wealth's (very plain and simple situations)?
Because, you 'll say, nothing calls for such a trial;—
Then there 's more good quality/good qualities in his (not doing what you want or giving yourself what you need).

He is your only poet;—passion, pure
And sparkling on from heap to heap, displays,
Possessed, the ore, of which mere hopes attraction
Nations crosswise/wrongly the deep: the golden rays
Flash up in ingots from the mine unknown;
On him the diamond pours its brilliant fire,
While the mild emerald's beam shades down the dies
Of other stones, to comfort the cheap person's eyes.

The lands on either side are his; the ship
From Ceylon, Inde, or far Cathay, unloads
For him the nice-smelling produce of each trip;
Beneath his cars of Ceres (deep, long sound of suffering) the roads,
And the vine reddish colors (in the cheeks) like Aurora's lip;
His very cellars might be kings' houses;
While he, hating every sexy/sex-related call,
Commands—the thinking-related lord of all.

Maybe he has great projects in his mind,
To build a college, or to found a race,
A hospital, a church,—and leave behind
Some dome covered on top by his poor/not enough face:
Maybe he pleased/with pleasure would free people
Even with the very ore which makes them base;
Maybe he would be richest of his nation,
Or enjoy the joys of calculation.

But whether all, or each, or none of these
May be the collector (who never throws anything out)'s way of thinking/basic truth/rule of action,
The fool will call such (wild, over-energetic mental illness) a disease:—
What is his own? Go—look at each transaction,
Wars, revels, loves—do these bring men more ease
Than the mere walking slowly and heavily through each 'vulgar fraction'?
Or do they benefit people? Lean cheap person!
Let big spenders' heirs enquire of yours—who 's wiser?

How beautiful are rouleaus! how charming chests
Containing ingots, bags of dollars, coins
(Not of old victors, all whose heads and crests
Weigh not the thin ore where their face shines,
But) of fine unclipt gold, where dully rests
Some likeness, which the shining and twinkling (like jewelry) cirque confines,
Of modern, ruling, sterling, stupid stamp:—
Yes! ready money is Aladdin's lamp.

'Love rules the camp, the court, the group of trees,'—'for love
Is heaven, and heaven is love:'—so sings the poet;
Which it were rather very hard to prove
(A thing with poetry in general hard).
Maybe there may be something in ithe group of trees,'
At least it rhymes to 'love;' but I 'm prepared
To doubt (no less than (managers of apartment buildings) of their rental)
If 'courts' and 'camps' be quite so emotional.

But if Love don't, Cash does, and Cash alone:
Cash rules the group of trees, and destroys/cuts down it too besides;
Without cash, camps were thin, and courts were none;
Without cash, Malthus tells you—'take no brides.'
So Cash rules Love the ruler, on his own
High ground, as virgin Cynthia sways the tides:
And as for Heaven 'Heaven being Love,' why not say honey
Is wax? Heaven is not Love, it is Marriage.

Is not all love prohibited whatever,
Excepting marriage? which is love, no doubt,
After a sort; but somehow people never
With the same thought the two words have help'd out:
Love may exist with marriage, and should ever,
And marriage also may exist without;
But love without bans is both a sin and shame,
And should go by quite another name.

Now if the 'court,' and 'camp,' and 'grove,' be not
Recruited all with constant married men,
Who never jealously desired their neighbour's lot,
I say that line 's a lapsus of the pen;—
Strange too in my 'buon camerado' Scott,
So celebrated for his morals, when
My Jeffrey held him up as an example
To me;—of whom these morals are a sample.

Well, if I don't succeed, I have succeeded,
And that 's enough; succeeded in my youth,
The only time when much success is needed:
And my success produced what I, in truth,
Cared most about; it need not now be pleaded—
Whatever it was, 't was mine; I 've paid, in truth,
Of late the penalty of such success,
But have not learned to wish it any less.

That suit in Chancery,—which some people plead
In (a request to/a court challenge to) the unborn, whom they,
In the faith of their baby-making religious belief,
Baptize future people/the future, or future clay,—
To me seems but a doubtful kind of reed
To lean on for support in any way;
Since odds are that future people/the future will know
No more of them, than they of her, I think.

Why, I 'm future people/the future—and so are you;
And whom do we remember? Not a hundred.
Were every memory written down all true,
The tenth or twentieth name would be but blunder'd;
Even Plutarch's Lives have only pick'd out a few,
And against those few your annalists have thunder'd;
And Mitford in the nineteenth century
Gives, with Greek truth, the good old Greek the lie.

Good people all, of every degree,
You gentle readers and bold and rude writers,
In this twelfth (part of a poem) it is my wish to be
As serious as if I had for writers
Malthus and Wilberforce:—the last set free
The Negroes and is worth a million fighters;
While Wellington has only (captured into slavery) the Whites,
And Malthus does the thing against which he writes.

I 'm serious—so are all men upon paper;
And why should I not form my guess/guessing,
And hold up to the sun my little thin candle?
People just now seem wrapped in mediation
On constitutions and steam-boats of vapour;
While smart people write against all making babies,
Unless a man can calculate his means
Of feeding brats the moment his wife (slowly reduces dependence).

That 's noble! That 's romantic! For my part,
I think that 'Philo-genitiveness' is
(Now here 's a word quite after my own heart,
Though there 's a shorter a good deal than this,
If that politeness set it not apart;
But I 'm promised to say nothing that 's wrongly)—
I say, I think that 'Philo-genitiveness'
Might meet from men a little more (state of mind where you no longer are angry at or want to punish someone).

And now to business.—O my gentle Juan,
You are in London—in that pleasant place,
Where every kind of mischief 's daily brewing,
Which can wait for warm youth in its wild race.
It is true, that your career is not a new one;
You are no beginner in the rushed chase
Of early life; but this is a new land,
Which foreigners can never understand.

What with a small (many different kinds of people or things) of climate,
Of hot or cold, moody or calm,
I could send forward my order like a (monkey, ape, etc.)
Upon the rest of Europe's social state;
But you are the hardest to rhyme at,
Great Britain, which the Art goddess may penetrate.
All countries have their 'Lions,' but in the
There is only one excellent collection.

But I am sick of politics. Begin,
'Paulo Majora.' Juan, undecided
Among the paths of being 'taken in,'
Above the ice had like a skater glided:
When tired of play, he flirted without sin
With some of those fair creatures who have prided
Themselves on innocent tantalisation,
And hate all crime/harmful behavior except its reputation.

But these are few, and in the end they make
Some devilish wild, trick-filled adventure or stir, which shows
That even the purest people may mistake
Their way through good thing/excellence/advantage's pale yellow/flower paths of snows;
And then men stare, as if a new ass spoke
To Balaam, and from tongue to ear overflows
Mercury small talk, ending (if you note it)
With the kind world's amen—'Who would have thought it?'

The little Leila, with her orient eyes,
And quiet Asiatic personality/desire
(Which saw all western things with small surprise,
To the surprise of people of condition,
Who think that novelties are butterflies
To be chased after as food for inanition),
Her charming figure and romantic history
Became a kind of beautiful mystery.

The women much divided—as is usual
Among the sex in little things or great.
Think not, fair creatures, that I mean to (treat or use in a very mean, unfair way) you all—
I have always liked you better than I state:
Since I 've grown moral, still I must (charge with a crime) you all
Of being likely to talk at a great rate;
And now there was a general feeling/excited feeling
Among you, about Leila's education.

In one point only were you settled—and
You had reason; 't was that a young child of grace,
As beautiful as her own native land,
And far away, the last bud of her race,
However our friend Don Juan might command
Himself for five, four, three, or two years' space,
Would be much better taught beneath the eye
Of peeresses whose silly mistakes had run dry.

So first there was a generous (copying/desire to copy and exceed),
And then there was a general competition,
To begin/try the orphan's education.
As Juan was a person of condition,
It had been an insult on this occasion
To talk of a subscription or petition;
But sixteen rich older women, ten unwed she smart people,
Whose story belongs to 'Hallam's Middle Ages,'

And one or two sad, separate wives, without
A fruit to bloom upon their shrinking and dying bough—
Begg'd to bring up the little girl and 'out,'-
For that 's the phrase that settles all things now,
Meaning a virgin's first reddish color (in the cheeks) at a rout,
And all her points as thorough-raised/trained to show:
And I promise to you, that like virgin honey
Tastes their first season (mostly if they have money).

How all the needy honorable misters,
Each out-at-elbow (person who is in a similar age group or academic field), or (without hope/very upset) (good thing/a man who dresses in a fancy way),
The watchful mothers, and the careful sisters
(Who, by the by, when clever, are more (conveniently nearby/useful)
At making matches, where ''t is gold that glisters,'
Than their he relatives), like flies over candy
Buzz round 'the Fortune' with their busy battery,
To turn her head with waltzing and with complements!

Each aunt, each cousin, has her guess/guessing;
No, married women will now and then discover
Such total/totally/with nothing else mixed in fair/not interestedness of passion,
I 've known them court an heiress for their lover.
'Tantaene!' Such the good qualities/the advantages of high station,
Even in the hopeful Isle, whose outlet 's 'Dover!'
While the poor rich miserable, awful person, object of these cares,
Has cause to wish her sire had had male heirs.

Some are soon bagg'd, and some reject three dozen.
It is fine to see them scattering refusals
And wild upset (feelings) over every angry cousin
(Friends of the party), who begin (charges of wrongdoing against people),
Such as—'Unless Miss (Blank) meant to have chosen
Poor Frederick, why did she agree/give careful readings
To his (places for soldiers to sleep)? Why waltz with him? Why, I pray,
Look yes last night, and yet say no to-day?

'Why?—Why?—Besides, Fred really was attach'd;
It was not her fortune—he has enough without:
The time will come she 'll wish that she had grabbed
So good an opportunity, no doubt:—
But the old marchioness some plan had hatched/created,
As I 'll tell Aurea at to-morrow's rout:
And after all poor Frederick may do better—
Pray did you see her answer to his letter?'

Smart uniforms and sparkling coronets
Are reject'd in turn, until her turn arrives,
After male loss of time, and hearts, and bets
Upon the sweepstakes for big wives;
And when at last the pretty creature gets
Some gentleman, who fights, or writes, or drives,
It comforts the awkward squad of the rejected
To find how very badly she selected.

For sometimes they accept some long (someone who chases after someone),
Worn out with begging; or fall
(But here maybe the events are fewer)
To the lot of him who rare/not enough chased after at all.
A hazy widower turned of forty 's sure
(If it is not (self-loving/useless) examples to recall)
To draw a high prize: now, however he got her, I
See nothing more strange in this than t' other lottery.

I, for my part (one 'modern instance' more,
'True, it is a pity—pity it is, it is true'),
Was chosen from out a loving score,
Although my years were less quiet (so nobody else will know) than few;
But though I also had reform'd before
Those became one who soon were to be two,
I 'll not argue the generous public's voice,
That the young lady made a monster-like choice.

O, pardon my movement away from the main point—or at least
Carefully read! It is always with a moral end
That I dissert, like grace before a feast:
For like an (old/allowed to get old/got older) aunt, or boring and annoying friend,
A stiff/not flexible (person who protects another from harm), or an energetic priest,
My Art goddess by strong encouragement means to mend
All people, at all times, and in most places,
Which puts my Pegasus to these grave paces.

But now I 'm going to be socially wrong; now
I mean to show things really as they are,
Not as they should be: for I promise,
That till we see what 's what in fact, we 're far
From much improvement with that honest and good plough
Which skims the surface, leaving hardly a scar
Upon the black rich, dark soil long poop/fertilizerd by Crime/harmful behavior,
Only to keep its corn at the old price.

But first of little Leila we 'll dispose;
For like a day-dawn she was young and total/totally/with nothing else mixed in,
Or like the old comparison of snows,
Which are more total/totally/with nothing else mixed in than pleasant to be sure.
Like many people everybody knows,
Don Juan was delighted to secure
A good guardian for his infant charge,
Who might not (make money/get something good) much by being at large.

Besides, he had found out he was no tutor
(I wish that others would find out the same);
And rather wished in such things to stand neuter,
For silly wards will bring their guardians blame:
So when he saw each very old dame a romantic interest
To make his little wild Asiatic tame,
Consulting 'the (community of people/all good people in the world) for Vice
Stopping/preventing (actions or feelings),' Lady Pinchbeck was his choice.

Olden she was—but had been very young;
Honest and good she was—and had been, I believe;
Although the world has such an evil tongue
That—but my (not involved with sex or sex-related things)r ear will not receive
An echo of a syllable that 's wrong:
In fact, there 's nothing makes me so much suffer (because of death),
As that terrible gossip,
Which is the cud avoid'd by human (cows, bulls, etc.).

More than that I 've remark'd (and I was once
A small/short (person who watches something) in a modest way),
And so may every one except a fool,
That ladies in their youth a little gay,
Besides their knowledge of the world, and sense
Of the sad result of going away from what's right,
Are wiser in their warnings against the woe
Which the mere loveless and unemotional can never know.

While the harsh boring and strict person (protects against damage or loss of money) her good thing/excellence/advantage
By railing at the unknown and much-wanted passion,
Looking (for) far less to save you than to hurt you,
Or, what 's still worse, to put you out of fashion,—
The kinder (person with lots of experience/person who served in the military) with calm words will court you,
Begging you to pause before you dash on;
Explaining and illustrating the riddle
Of hugely important (work) Love's beginning, end, and middle.

Now whether it be this way, or that they are stricter,
As better knowing why they should be so,
I think you 'll find from many a family picture,
That daughters of such mothers as may know
The world by experience rather than by lecture,
Turn out much better for the Smithfield Show
Of (virgin-related)s brought into the marriage mart,
Than those raised/trained up by boring and strict people without a heart.

I said that Lady Pinchbeck had been talked about—
As who has not, if female, young, and pretty?
But now no more the ghost of (shameful and disgraceful act or situation) stalk'd about;
She only was thought of/considered friendly and cleverly funny,
And (more than two, but not a lot of) of her best bon-mots were hawk'd about:
Then she was given to organizations that help needy people and pity,
And passed (at least the last thing just mentioned years of life)
For being a most excellent wife.

High in high circles, gentle in her own,
She was the mild criticizer of the young,
Whenever—which means every day—they 'd shown
An awkward desire to go wrong.
The amount of good she did 's unknown,
Or at the least would lengthen out my song:
In brief, the little person (with no parents) of the East
Had raised an interest in her, which increased.

Juan, too, was a sort of favourite with her,
Because she thought him a good heart at bottom,
A little spoil'd, but not so completely;
Which was a wonder, if you think who got him,
And how he had been tossed, he rare/not enough knew to where:
Though this might ruin others, it did not him,
At least completely—for he had seen too many
Changes in youth, to be surprised at any.

And these changes in fortune tell best in youth;
For when they happen at a riper age,
People are likely to blame the (unavoidable, already-decided futures), truly,
And wonder Care (from God?) is not more smart.
Trouble/difficulty is the first path to truth:
He who has proved war, storm, or woman's rage,
Whether his winters be eighteen or eighty,
Has won the experience which is thought of/considered so serious.

How far it (makes money/gets something good) is another matter.-
Our hero gladly saw his little charge
Safe with a lady, whose last adult daughter
Being long married, and so set at large,
Had left all the (things that were completed) she taught her
To be transmitted, like the Lord Mayor's barge,
To the next comer; or—as it will tell
More Muse-like—like to Cytherea's shell.

I call such things transmission; for there is
A floating balance of (something that was completed)
Which forms a (proof of coming from an excellent family) from Miss to Miss,
According as their minds or backs are bent.
Some waltz; some draw; some fathom the abyss
Of metaphysics; others are content
With music; the most not extreme/medium-level shine as wits;
While others have a genius turned for fits.

But whether fits, or wits, or harpsichords,
Study of God, fine arts, or finer stays,
May be the baits for gentlemen or lords
With regular lowering/downward movement/family origins, in these our days,
The last year to the new moves (from one place to another) its hoards;
New (virgin-related)s claim men's eyes with the same praise
Of 'elegant' et caetera, in fresh batches—
All (nothing else like it in the world) creatures, and yet bent on matches.

But now I will begin my poem. It is
Maybe a little strange, if not quite new,
That from the first of (parts of a poem) up to this
I 've not begun what we have to go through.
These first twelve books are only grows well/decorations/shows and waves,
Preludios, trying just a string or two
Upon my lyre, or making the pegs sure;
And when so, you will have the (action or statement from someone who wants to start a relationship or achieve peace).

My Muses do not care a pinch of rosin
About what 's called success, or not succeeding:
Such thoughts are quite below the strain they have chosen;
It is a 'great moral lesson' they are reading.
I thought, at setting off, about two dozen
(parts of a poem) would do; but at Apollo's pleading,
If that my Pegasus should not be founder'd,
I think to run gently through a hundred.

Don Juan saw that tiny world/tiny example on stilts,
Yclept the Great World; for it is the least,
Although the highest: but as swords have hilts
By which their power of mischief is increased,
When man in fight or in argument tilts,
This way the low world, north, south, or west, or east,
Must still exactly follow the high—which is their handle,
Their moon, their sun, their gas, their coin (of low value) candle.

He had many friends who had many wives, and was
Well looked upon by both, to that extent
Of friendship which you may accept or pass,
It does nor good nor harm being only meant
To keep the wheels going of the higher class,
And draw them nightly when a ticket 's sent:
And what with pretends/mask-wearing parties, and celebrations, and balls,
For the first season such a life rare/not enough dark clouds/quiet moods.

A young unmarried man, with a good name
And fortune, has an awkward part to play;
For good (community of people/all good people in the world) is only a game,
'The royal game of Goose,' as I may say,
Where every body has some separate aim,
An end to answer, or a plan to lay—
The single ladies wishing to be double,
The married ones to save the virgins trouble.

I don't mean this as general, but particular
Examples may be found of such (instances of chasing after something or trying to do something):
Though (more than two, but not a lot of) also keep their perpendicular
Like poplars, with good ways of thinking/basic truths/rules for roots;
Yet many have a method more reticular—
'Fishers for men,' like sirens with soft (string instruments):
For talk six times with the same single lady,
And you may get the wedding dresses ready.

Maybe you 'll have a letter from the mother,
To say her daughter's feelings are trepann'd;
Maybe you 'll have a visit from the brother,
All strut, and stays, and whiskers, to demand
What 'your plans/desires are?'—One way or other
It seems the virgin's heart expects your hand:
And between pity for her case and yours,
You 'll add to Marriage's list of cures.

I 've known twelve weddings made even this way,
And some of them high names: I have also known
Young men who—though they hated to discuss
Snobbiness which they never dreamed to have shown—
Yet neither frighten'd by a female fuss,
Nor by mustachios moved, were let alone,
And lived, as did the broken-hearted fair,
In happier trouble(s) than if they form'd a pair.

There 's also nightly, to the (people that don't know about something or who never did something),
A danger—not in fact like love or marriage,
But not the less for this to be (lowered in value):
It is—I meant and mean not to criticize
The show of good and right behavior even in the weakened—
It adds an outward grace unto their (vehicle with wheels/body posture/carrying something)—
But to say bad things about the land and water sort of prostitute,
'Couleur de rose,' who 's neither white nor bright red.

Such is your cold flirt, who can't say 'No,'
And won't say 'Yes,' and keeps you on and off-ing
On a lee-shore, till it begins to blow—
Then sees your heart wreck'd, with an inward making fun (of something).
This works a world of emotional trouble,
And sends new Wereers yearly to their coffin;
But yet is only innocent flirtation,
Not quite (cheating on your spouse), but ruining.

'Ye gods, I grow a talker!' Let us stupid(ly) talk.
The next of dangers, though I place it most serious and sad,
Is when, without regard to 'church or state,'
A wife makes or takes love in upright serious and honest.
In other countries, such things decide few women's fate—
(Such, early traveller! is the truth you learnest)—
But in old England, when a young bride makes a mistake,
Poor thing! Eve's was a trifling case to hers.

For it is a low, newspaper, boring, lawsuit
Country, where a young couple of the same ages
Can't form a friendship, but the world overawes it.
A legal decision—terrible enemy to those who cause it!-
Forms a sad (exciting part of something) to romantic respects;
Besides those comforting speeches of the pleaders,
And (event(s) or object(s) that prove something)s which give/entertain all readers.

But they who make a mistake this way are raw beginners;
A little friendly sprinkling of (when a person doesn't do what he or she orders everyone else to do)
Has saved the fame of thousand great sinners,
The loveliest rich, powerful people of our gynocracy;
You may see such at all the balls and dinners,
Among the proudest of our (related to rich people),
So gentle, charming, helpful, (not involved with sex or sex-related things)—
And all by having skill (when dealing with people) as well as taste.

Juan, who did not stand in the difficult situation
Of only a little beginner, had one safeguard more;
For he was sick—no, 't was not the word sick I meant—
But he had seen so much love before,
That he was not in heart so very weak;—I meant
But this way much, and no frown against the shore
Of white cliffs, white necks, blue eyes, bluer stockings,
Give one-tenth/one-tenths, taxes, demands payment, and doors with double knockings.

But coming young from lands and scenes romantic,
Where lives, not lawsuits, must be risk'd for Passion,
And Passion's self must have a spice of rushing and upset,
Into a country where it is half a fashion,
Seemed to him half commercial, half snobby and annoying (because of always correcting people),
However he might respect this moral nation:
Besides ((what a shame)! his taste—forgive and pity!)
At first he did not think the women pretty.

I say at first—for he found out at last,
But by degrees, that they were fairer far
Than the more glowing women whose lot is cast
Beneath the influence of the eastern star.
A further proof we should not judge in (hurrying/foolish rushing);
Yet inexperience could not be his bar
To taste:—the truth is, if men would confess,
That novelties please less than they impress.

Though travell'd, I have never had the luck to
Trace up those shuffling negroes, Nile or Niger,
To that not practical place, Timbuctoo,
Where (the study of (or the location of) mountains, rivers, hills, etc.) finds no one to oblige her
With such a chart as may be safely stuck to—
For Europe ploughs in Afric like 'bos piger:'
But if I had been at Timbuctoo, there
No doubt I should be told that black is fair.

It is. I will not swear that black is white;
But I suspect in fact that white is black,
And the whole matter rests upon eyesight.
Ask a blind man, the best judge. You 'll attack
Maybe this new position—but I 'm right;
Or if I 'm wrong, I 'll not be taken aback:—
He has no morning nor night, but all is dark
Within; and what see you? A doubtful spark.

But I 'm suffering again from disease into metaphysics,
That maze, whose clue is of the same
Construction as your cures for very busy phthisics,
Those bright moths flapping wings/moving unsteadily round a dying flame;
And this reflection brings me to plain physics,
And to the beauties of a foreign dame,
Compared with those of our total/totally/with nothing else mixed in pearls of price,
Those polar summers, all sun, and some ice.

Or say they are like honest and good mermaids, whose
Beginnings are fair faces, ends mere fishes;—
Not that there 's not an amount of those
Who have a due respect for their own wishes.
Like Russians rushing from hot baths to snows
Are they, at bottom honest and good even when evil and violent:
They warm into a fight, but keep of course,
As a reserve, a steep drop into shame and guilt.

But this has nothing to do with their outsides.
I said that Juan did not think them pretty
At the first reddish color (in the cheeks); for a fair Briton hides
Half her attractions—probably from pity—
And rather (in a relaxed, controlled way) into the heart glides,
Than storms it as an enemy would take a city;
But once there (if you doubt this please try)
She keeps it for you like a true friend.

She cannot step as does an Arab sharp point,
Or Andalusian girl from mass returning,
Nor wear as beautifully as Gauls her clothing,
Nor in her eye Ausonia's quick look is burning;
Her voice, though sweet, is not so fit to warb—
le those bravuras (which I still am learning
To like, though I have been seven years in Italy,
And have, or had, an ear that served me prettily);—

She cannot do these things, nor one or two
Others, in that off-hand and dashing style
Which takes so much—to give the devil his due;
Nor is she quite so ready with her smile,
Nor settles all things in one interview
(A thing approved as saving time and work hard);—
But though the soil may give you time and trouble,
Well helped grow, it will make/give double.

And if in fact she takes to a 'grande passion,'
It is a very serious thing in fact:
Nine times in ten it is but moodiness or fashion,
Flirtiness, or a wish to take the lead,
The pride of only a little child with a new sash on,
Or wish to make a rival's chest bleed:
But the tenth instance will be a tornado,
For there 's no saying what they will or may do.

The reason 's obvious; if there 's a style,
They lose their social class at once, as do the Parias;
And when the delicious things of the law
Have filled their papers with their comments different,
(community of people/all good people in the world), that china without flaw
(The person who doesn't follow (his or her) own rules!), will kick out them like Marius,
To sit in the middle of the ruins of their guilt:
For Fame 's a Carthage not so soon rebuilt.

Maybe this is as it should be;—it is
A comment on the Gospel's 'Sin no more,
And be your sins forgiven:'—but upon this
I leave the saints to settle their own score.
In other countries, though definitely they do much wrongly,
An imperfect woman finds an opener door
For her return to Good thing/excellence/advantage—as they cal
That lady, who should be at home to all.

For me, I leave the matter where I find it,
Knowing that such uneasy good thing/excellence/advantage leads
People some ten times less in fact to mind it,
And care but for discoveries and not deeds.
And as for (never having sex), you 'll never bind it
By all the laws the strictest lawyer pleads,
But (irritate/make worse) the crime you have not prevented,
By creating and displaying (without hope/very upset) those who had else (very sorry for past sin).

But Juan was no (very detailed thinker about right and wrong), nor had thought carefully about
Upon the moral lessons of people:
Besides, he had not seen of (more than two hundred)
A lady completely to his mind.
A little 'blase'—'t is not to be wonder'd
At, that his heart had got a tougher rind:
And though not vainer from his past success,
No doubt his thoughts and feelings were less.

He also had been busy seeing sights—
The Parliament and all the other houses;
Had sat beneath the gallery at nights,
To hear debates whose thunder awakened (not awakens)
The world to look at those northern lights
Which flash'd as far as where the musk-bull looks at/looks through;
He had also stood at times behind the (seat of power of a king or queen)—
But Grey was not arrived, and Chatham gone.

He saw, however, at the closing session,
That noble sight, when really free the nation,
A king in (agreeing with, or related to, the Constitution) possession
Of such a (seat of power of a king or queen) as is the proudest station,
Though cruel kings or queens know it not—till the (development or increase over time/series of events or things)
Of freedom will complete their education.
It is not mere beauty makes the show august
To eye or heart—it is the people's trust.

There, too, he saw (whatever he may be now)
A Prince, the prince of princes at the time,
With fascination in his very bow,
And full of promise, as the spring of most important.
Though royalty was written on his brow,
He had then the grace, too, rare in every climate,
Of being, without mix/mixture (of metals) of (snobby man who's ridiculously focused on his appearance) or lover,
A finish'd gentleman from top to toe.

And Juan was received, as has been said,
Into the best (community of people/all good people in the world): and there
Happenr'd what often happens, I 'm afraid,
However controlled/punished and debonnaire:—
The talent and good humour he displayed,
Besides the marked honor/difference of his air,
Exposed him, as was natural, to (something that makes you want to do something/the feeling of wanting to do something),
Even though himself avoided the occasion.

But what, and where, with whom, and when, and why,
Is not to be put quickly together;
And as my object is sense of right and wrong
(Whatever people say), I don't know whether
I 'll leave a single reader's eyelid dry,
But harrow up his feelings till they shrink and die,
And chop/shape out a huge monument of emotion,
As Philip's son proposed to do with Athos.

Here the twelfth (part of a poem) of our introduction
Ends. When the body of the book 's begun,
You 'll find it of a different construction
From what some people say 't will be when done:
The plan now 's simply in creation,
I can't oblige you, reader, to read on;
That 's your affair, not mine: a real spirit
Should neither court neglect, nor fear (of a terrible future) to bear it.

And if my thunderbolt not always rattles,
Remember, reader! you have had before
The worst of storms and the best of fights
That ever were brew'd from elements or severely injure,
Besides the most amazing of—Heaven knows what else:
A high-interest money lender could rare/not enough expect much more—
But my best (part of a poem), save one on (the study of outer space),
Will turn upon 'political (process of people making, selling, and buying things).'

That is your present theme for (quality of being liked a lot or done a lot):
Now that the public hedge has hardly a stake,
It grows an act of country-loving (generous kindness/organization that helps people),
To show the people the best way to break.
My plan (but I, if but for amazing nature,
Reserve it) will be very sure to take.
Meantime, read all the national debt-sinkers,
And tell me what you think of your great thinkers.