A glorious triumph! a deathless deed!--
  Shall the hero rest and his work half done
Is it enough to enfranchise a creed,
  When a nation's freedom may yet be won
Is it enough to hang on the wall
  The broken links of the Catholic chain,
When now one mighty struggle for ALL
  May quicken the life in the land again--

May quicken the life, for the land lay dead;
  No central fire was a heart in its breast,--
No throbbing veins, with the life-blood red,
  Ran out like rivers to east or west
Its soul was gone, and had left it clay--
  Dull clay to grow but the grass and the root;
But harvests for Men, ah! where were they--
  And where was the tree for Liberty's fruit

Never till then, in victory's hour,
  Had a conqueror felt a joy so sweet,
As when the wand of his well-won power
  O'Connell laid at his country's feet.
No! not for me, nor for mine alone,
  The generous victor cried, Have I fought,
But to see my Eire again on her throne;
  Ah, that was my dream and my guiding thought.

To see my Eire again on her throne,
  Her tresses with lilies and shamrocks twined,
Her severed sons to a nation grown,
  Her hostile hues in one flag combined;
Her wisest gathered in grave debate,
  Her bravest armed to resist the foe
To see my country 'glorious and great,'--
  To see her 'free,'--to fight I go!

And forth he went to the peaceful fight,
  And the millions rose at his words of fire,
As the lightning's leap from the depth of the night,
  And circle some mighty minster's spire
Ah, ill had it fared with the hapless land,
  If the power that had roused could not restrain
If the bolts were not grasped in a glowing hand
  To be hurled in peals of thunder again

And thus the people followed his path,
  As if drawn on by a magic spell,--
By the royal hill and the haunted rath,
  By the hallowed spring and the holy well,
By all the shrines that to Erin are dear,
  Round which her love like the ivy clings,--
Still folding in leaves that never grow sere
  The cell of the saint and the home of kings.

And a soul of sweetness came into the land
  Once more was the harp of Erin strung;
Once more on the notes from some master hand
  The listening land in its rapture hung.
Once more with the golden glory of words
  Were the youthful orator's lips inspired,
Till he touched the heart to its tenderest chords,
  And quickened the pulse which his voice had fired.

And others divinely dowered to teach--
  High souls of honour, pure hearts of fire,
So startled the world with their rhythmic speech,
  That it seemed attuned to some unseen lyre.
But the kingliest voice God ever gave man
  Words sweeter still spoke than poet hath sung,--
For a nation's wail through the numbers ran,
  And the soul of the Celt exhaled on his tongue.

And again the foe had been forced to yield;
  But the hero at last waxed feeble and old,
Yet he scattered the seed in a fruitful field,
  To wave in good time as a harvest of gold.
Then seeking the feet of God's High Priest,
  He slept by the soft Ligurian Sea,
Leaving a light, like the Star in the East,
  To lead the land that will yet be free.