They are dying! they are dying! where the golden corn is growing,
They are dying! they are dying! where the crowded herds are lowing;
They are gasping for existence where the streams of life are flowing,
And they perish of the plague where the breeze of health is blowing!

        God of Justice!  God of Power!
          Do we dream  Can it be
        In this land, at this hour,
          With the blossom on the tree,
        In the gladsome month of May,
        When the young lambs play,
        When Nature looks around
          On her waking children now,
        The seed within the ground,
          The bud upon the bough
        Is it right, is it fair,
        That we perish of despair
        In this land, on this soil,
          Where our destiny is set,
        Which we cultured with our toil,
          And watered with our sweat

        We have ploughed, we have sown
        But the crop was not our own;
        We have reaped, but harpy hands
        Swept the harvest from our lands;
        We were perishing for food,
        When, lo! in pitying mood,
        Our kindly rulers gave
        The fat fluid of the slave,
        While our corn filled the manger
        Of the war-horse of the stranger!

        God of Mercy! must this last
          Is this land preordained
        For the present and the past,
          And the future, to be chained,
          To be ravaged, to be drained,
        To be robbed, to be spoiled,
          To be hushed, to be whipt,
          Its soaring pinions clipt,
        And its every effort foiled

        Do our numbers multiply
        But to perish and to die
          Is this all our destiny below,
        That our bodies, as they rot,
        May fertilise the spot
          Where the harvests of the stranger grow

        If this be, indeed, our fate,
        Far, far better now, though late,
That we seek some other land and try some other zone;
        The coldest, bleakest shore
        Will surely yield us more
Than the store-house of the stranger that we dare not call our own.

        Kindly brothers of the West,
        Who from Liberty's full breast
Have fed us, who are orphans, beneath a step-dame's frown,
        Behold our happy state,
        And weep your wretched fate
That you share not in the splendours of our empire and our crown!

        Kindly brothers of the East,
        Thou great tiara'd priest,
Thou sanctified Rienzi of Rome and of the earth--
        Or thou who bear'st control
        Over golden Istambol,
Who felt for our misfortunes and helped us in our dearth,

        Turn here your wondering eyes,
        Call your wisest of the wise,
Your Muftis and your ministers, your men of deepest lore;
        Let the sagest of your sages
        Ope our island's mystic pages,
And explain unto your Highness the wonders of our shore.

        A fruitful teeming soil,
        Where the patient peasants toil
Beneath the summer's sun and the watery winter sky--
        Where they tend the golden grain
        Till it bends upon the plain,
Then reap it for the stranger, and turn aside to die.

        Where they watch their flocks increase,
        And store the snowy fleece,
Till they send it to their masters to be woven o'er the waves;
        Where, having sent their meat
        For the foreigner to eat,
Their mission is fulfilled, and they creep into their graves.

'Tis for this they are dying where the golden corn is growing,
'Tis for this they are dying where the crowded herds are lowing,
'Tis for this they are dying where the streams of life are flowing,
And they perish of the plague where the breeze of health is blowing.