A lady came to a snow-white bier,
  Where a youth lay pale and dead
  She took the veil from her widowed head,
  And, bending low, in his ear she said
        Awaken! for I am here.

She pass'd with a smile to a wild wood near,
  Where the boughs were barren and bare;
  She tapp'd on the bark with her fingers fair,
  And call'd to the leaves that were buried there
        Awaken! for I am here.

The birds beheld her without a fear,
  As she walk'd through the dank-moss'd dells;
  She breathed on their downy citadels,
  And whisper'd the young in their ivory shells
        Awaken! for I am here.

On the graves of the flowers she dropp'd a tear,
  But with hope and with joy, like us;
  And even as the Lord to Lazarus,
  She call'd to the slumbering sweet flowers thus
        Awaken! for I am here.

To the lilies that lay in the silver mere,
  To the reeds by the golden pond;
  To the moss by the rounded marge beyond,
  She spoke with her voice so soft and fond
        Awaken! for I am here.

The violet peep'd, with its blue eye clear,
  From under its own gravestone;
  For the blessed tidings around had flown,
  And before she spoke the impulse was known
        Awaken! for I am here.

The pale grass lay with its long looks sere
  On the breast of the open plain;
  She loosened the matted hair of the slain,
  And cried, as she filled each juicy vein
        Awaken! for I am here.

The rush rose up with its pointed spear
  The flag, with its falchion broad;
  The dock uplifted its shield unawed,
  As her voice rung over the quickening sod
        Awaken! for I am here.

The red blood ran through the clover near,
  And the heath on the hills o'erhead;
  The daisy's fingers were tipp'd with red,
  As she started to life, when the lady said
        Awaken! for I am here.

And the young Year rose from his snow-white bier,
  And the flowers from their green retreat;
  And they came and knelt at the lady's feet,
  Saying all, with their mingled voices sweet
        O lady! behold us here.