      WINTERTIME nighs;
   But my bereavement-pain
   It cannot bring again
      Twice no one dies.

      Flower-petals flee;
   But, since it once hath been,
   No more that severing scene
      Can harrow me.

      Birds faint in dread
   I shall not lose old strength
   In the lone frost’s black length
      Strength long since fled!

      Leaves freeze to dun;
   But friends can not turn cold
   This season as of old
      For him with none.

      Tempests may scath;
   But love can not make smart
   Again this year his heart
      Who no heart hath.

      Black is night’s cope;
   But death will not appal
   One who, past doubtings all,
      Waits in unhope.



   WHEN the clouds’ swoln bosoms echo back the shouts of the many and
   strong
   That things are all as they best may be, save a few to be right ere
   long,
   And my eyes have not the vision in them to discern what to these is so
   clear,
   The blot seems straightway in me alone; one better he were not here.

   The stout upstanders say, All’s well with us ruers have nought to
   rue!
   And what the potent say so oft, can it fail to be somewhat true
   Breezily go they, breezily come; their dust smokes around their
   career,
   Till I think I am one horn out of due time, who has no calling here.

   Their dawns bring lusty joys, it seems; their eves exultance sweet;
   Our times are blessed times, they cry Life shapes it as is most meet,
   And nothing is much the matter; there are many smiles to a tear;
   Then what is the matter is I, I say.  Why should such an one be here
   . . .

   Let him to whose ears the low-voiced Best seems stilled by the clash
   of the First,
   Who holds that if way to the Better there be, it exacts a full look at
   the Worst,
   Who feels that delight is a delicate growth cramped by crookedness,
   custom, and fear,
   Get him up and be gone as one shaped awry; he disturbs the order here.



    “Heu mihi, quia incolatus meus prolongatus est!  Habitavi cum
    habitantibus Cedar; multum incola fuit aninia mea.”—_Ps._ cxix.

   THERE have been times when I well might have passed and the ending
   have come—
   Points in my path when the dark might have stolen on me, artless,
   unrueing—
   Ere I had learnt that the world was a welter of futile doing
   Such had been times when I well might have passed, and the ending have
   come!

   Say, on the noon when the half-sunny hours told that April was nigh,
   And I upgathered and cast forth the snow from the crocus-border,
   Fashioned and furbished the soil into a summer-seeming order,
   Glowing in gladsome faith that I quickened the year thereby.

   Or on that loneliest of eves when afar and benighted we stood,
   She who upheld me and I, in the midmost of Egdon together,
   Confident I in her watching and ward through the blackening heather,
   Deeming her matchless in might and with measureless scope endued.

   Or on that winter-wild night when, reclined by the chimney-nook quoin,
   Slowly a drowse overgat me, the smallest and feeblest of folk there,
   Weak from my baptism of pain; when at times and anon I awoke there—
   Heard of a world wheeling on, with no listing or longing to join.

   Even then! while unweeting that vision could vex or that knowledge
   could numb,
   That sweets to the mouth in the belly are bitter, and tart, and
   untoward,
   Then, on some dim-coloured scene should my briefly raised curtain have
   lowered,
   Then might the Voice that is law have said “Cease!” and the ending
   have come.