      The thick lids of Night closed upon me
         Alone at the Bill
         Of the Isle by the Race —
      Many-caverned, bald, wrinkled of face—
   And with darkness and silence the spirit was on me
         To brood and be still.

                                    
      No wind fanned the flats of the ocean,
         Or promontory sides,
         Or the ooze by the strand,
      Or the bent-bearded slope of the land,
   Whose base took its rest amid everlong motion
         Of criss-crossing tides.

                                   

      Soon from out of the Southward seemed nearing
         A whirr, as of wings
         Waved by mighty-vanned flies,
      Or by night-moths of measureless size,
   And in softness and smoothness well-nigh beyond hearing
         Of corporal things.

                                    

      And they bore to the bluff, and alighted—
         A dim-discerned train
         Of sprites without mould,
      Frameless souls none might touch or might hold—
   On the ledge by the turreted lantern, farsighted
         By men of the main.

                                    

      And I heard them say “Home!” and I knew them
         For souls of the felled
         On the earth’s nether bord
      Under Capricorn, whither they’d warred,
   And I neared in my awe, and gave heedfulness to them
         With breathings inheld.

                                    

      Then, it seemed, there approached from the northward
         A senior soul-flame
         Of the like filmy hue
      And he met them and spake “Is it you,
   O my men”  Said they, “Aye!  We bear homeward and hearthward
         To list to our fame!”

                                   

      “I’ve flown there before you,” he said then
         “Your households are well;
         But—your kin linger less
      On your glory arid war-mightiness
   Than on dearer things.”—“Dearer” cried these from the dead then,
         “Of what do they tell”

                                   

      “Some mothers muse sadly, and murmur
         Your doings as boys—
         Recall the quaint ways
      Of your babyhood’s innocent days.
   Some pray that, ere dying, your faith had grown firmer,
         And higher your joys.

                                    

      “A father broods ‘Would I had set him
         To some humble trade,
         And so slacked his high fire,
      And his passionate martial desire;
   Had told him no stories to woo him and whet him
         To this due crusade!”

                                    

      “And, General, how hold out our sweethearts,
         Sworn loyal as doves”
         —“Many mourn; many think
      It is not unattractive to prink
   Them in sables for heroes.   Some fickle and fleet hearts
         Have found them new loves.”

                                    

      “And our wives” quoth another resignedly,
         “Dwell they on our deeds”
         —“Deeds of home; that live yet
      Fresh as new—deeds of fondness or fret;
   Ancient words that were kindly expressed or unkindly,
         These, these have their heeds.”

                                   

      —“Alas! then it seems that our glory
         Weighs less in their thought
         Than our old homely acts,
      And the long-ago commonplace facts
   Of our lives—held by us as scarce part of our story,
         And rated as nought!”

                                   

      Then bitterly some “Was it wise now
         To raise the tomb-door
         For such knowledge  Away!”
      But the rest “Fame we prized till to-day;
   Yet that hearts keep us green for old kindness we prize now
         A thousand times more!”

                                   

      Thus speaking, the trooped apparitions
         Began to disband
         And resolve them in two
      Those whose record was lovely and true
   Bore to northward for home those of bitter traditions
         Again left the land,

                                    

      And, towering to seaward in legions,
         They paused at a spot
         Overbending the Race—
      That engulphing, ghast, sinister place—
   Whither headlong they plunged, to the fathomless regions
         Of myriads forgot.

                                   

      And the spirits of those who were homing
         Passed on, rushingly,
         Like the Pentecost Wind;
      And the whirr of their wayfaring thinned
   And surceased on the sky, and but left in the gloaming
         Sea-mutterings and me.